pmc1 Introduction

Medical literature has uncovered a number of reported cases about unintentional ingestion of foreign bodies (FBs). Although the vast majority of swallowed objects pass through the gastrointestinal tract uneventfully, some cases result in serious medical complications. The most common reported ingested sharp foreign bodies are fishbones and toothpicks [1]. These sharp foreign bodies tend to migrate from the gastrointestinal tract through many sites like the stomach, duodenum, sigmoid colon and ileocolic junction. This article presents a rare case of liver abscess attributed to the migration of a toothpick. To the best of our knowledge, only 22 cases of hepatic abscess resulted from a toothpick have been documented in the English medical literature [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]. This case report is presented in accordance with SCARE criteria [7].

2 Case presentation

A 64-year-old woman was referred to the hepatobiliary surgery department. The patient was previously admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) in a local hospital due to severe sepsis caused by a liver abscess, where a conservative treatment was applied with IV antibiotics. The conducted investigations in the previous local hospital attributed the liver abscess to a foreign body migration. After that, the patient was transferred to our hospital for surgical exploration.

The patient's past medical history was not remarkable for any comorbidities, surgical procedures or psychiatric disorders, apart from well controlled hypertension.

On arrival to our hepatobiliary unit, the patient's vital signs were stable. The main complaints were mild pain and discomfort in the right upper quadrant and flank. The patient denied any foreign body ingestion or recent trauma. The abdominal clinical examination did not reveal any abnormalities. Laboratory tests showed the following: normal range of white blood cells count, (C-reactive protein 48 mg/dL), (haemoglobin 9.2 g/dL), (hematocrit 24 %), (aspartate aminotransferase AST 45.4 IU/L), (alanine aminotransferase ALT 49.5 IU/L).

A computed tomography scan CT-scan obtained from the prior hospital demonstrated a hypodense area measured about 3 x 4 cm in the right lobe of the liver and a linear hyperdense feature adjacent to it (Fig. 1). In addition, an abdominal ultrasonography (US) was done, which exhibited an elongated hyperechoic structure in the segment V of the liver (Fig. 2).Fig. 1 Contrast-enhanced CT scan reveals an elongated hyperdense structure (yellow circle) inside the right lobe of the liver (segment V) surrounded by a hypodense area which represents the liver abscess. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Fig. 1

Fig. 2 Abdominal Ultrasound (US) showing a linear hyperechoic structure inside the right lobe of the liver.

Fig. 2

The patient was scheduled for selective laparotomy to extract the foreign body from the liver. A subcostal incision with midline extension was made to maintain good access. The intraoperative finding was a scar on the out surface of segment V along with loose adhesions between the first part of the duodenum and the inferior surface of the liver; that may suggest the probability of the toothpick's migration from D1 to the liver. Intraoperative ultrasound scan was utilized to locate and mark the foreign body within the liver parenchyma. A 5 cm incision was made in the liver capsule and a finger fracture technique of the hepatic parenchyma was used to reach the foreign body, which was found to be a toothpick measuring 5.5 cm-long embedded in a tough fibroid tissue within the hepatic parenchyma at a depth of about 4 cm from the liver capsule (Fig. 3.). The abdomen was closed and no drains were used. The patient spent two days on the ward and was discharged uneventfully.Fig. 3 The wooden toothpick extracted from the liver after laparotomy measured 5.5 cm in length.

Fig. 3

3 Discussion

Foreign body presence inside the liver is a rare incident. However, several mechanisms have been suggested to explain this rare destiny for the FB: iatrogenic, percutaneous, through the bloodstream, or via the gastrointestinal tract following a perforation after an ingestion. Fortunately, the vast majority of ingested objects pass through the alimentary tract uneventfully, although few of them can lead to serious sequelae [3], [8], as in our case.

Various kinds of objects can be swallowed intentionally or more frequent accidently. However, sharp, indigestible ones tend to cause damage, for example, fishbones [8], [9], chicken bones [1], sewing needles, and toothpicks. All people may swallow FBs by accident. However, there are categories of people who are prone to FB ingestion: children [10], patients with mental health disorders [11], alcoholics, and palatal insensitivity patients. Furthermore, like this case, most patients cannot recall the incident of swallowing the FB. Patients who managed to remember the swallowing episode estimated at 12 % [12], [13].

Ingested FBs can perforate any site they lodge in; However, most reported perforation sites followed by migration to the liver are: stomach [3], [8], [13] duodenum [14], and colonic hepatic flexure [2]. On the other hand, in many cases, no perforation site was found; which can be attributed to the chronicity and sealing of the injury [12], [15], [16]. Our patient denied ingesting a foreign body, but due to adhesions between the duodenum and liver, it was suggested that the toothpick may have inserted the liver through the duodenum.

Clinical manifestations are contingent on many factors such as the time, site and depth of the perforation. The most frequent symptoms related to liver abscess induced by a foreign body are pain [9], [12], [14] and fever [16]. In contrast, migration of foreign bodies can stay silent until manifested as an abscess or an accidental finding, as what Al-Khyatt et al. have reported; a toothpick was found accidentally in the porta hepatic during laparoscopic cholecystectomy [12]. The foreign body in our case was asymptomatic until the abscess developed.

Overall, suspicion of foreign body's existence in the liver should be raised when we encounter any of the following: (1) Cryptogenic liver abscess, (2) Episode of foreign body ingestion, and (3) Recurrent general unspecific symptoms (e.g. pain, fever, and asthenia) that do not respond to conservative treatment.

CT scan plays a pivotal and sufficient role in discovering foreign bodies located inside the liver [8]. Besides, it can be the only investigation that can lead to a clear diagnosis, and that is referred to its high resolution and accuracy. Although initial ultrasonography may reveal radio-lucent foreign bodies, CT scan is necessitated to confirm the diagnosis [13], [15]. In our case, the CT scan was sufficient to detect the foreign body, the abscess, and to make the surgical decision.

4 Conclusion

Clinical presentation of liver abscess is similar to that of acute abdominal conditions, and therefore a diagnosis strategy is required to determine the cause of the abscess in addition to successive methods of treatment.

Consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.

Provenance and peer review

Not commissioned, externally peer reviewed.

Ethical approval

The case report is exempt from ethical approval.

Funding

No sponsors for this case report.

Author contribution

Bushra Hassan: Original draft writing

Gulan Maree; Review & editing

AlYakzan Hassan; Data curation

Guarantor

Bushra Hassan

Conflict of interest statement

No conflicts of interest

☆ Toothpick inside the liver
