pmcIntroduction

Pulmonary vein isolation using radiofrequency ablation is an effective treatment option for patients with symptomatic atrial fibrillation (AF) [[1], [2], [3]–4]. Application of high power for a short period is reported to create more efficient lesions and may prevent collateral thermal injury to the esophagus [1–4]. In this article, we describe the case of a patient with a history of catheter ablation for AF who presented with purulent cardiac tamponade, revealing an oesophageal–pericardial fistula, followed by cerebral air embolism secondary to extension of the fistula to the left atrium.

Case presentation

A 66-year-old patient with a history of AF and common atrial flutter underwent a radiofrequency pulmonary vein isolation procedure, complemented by wide defragmentation of the left atrium with the creation of a posterior box. Sinus rhythm was restored after an external electric shock at 200 J. The procedure was performed with the patient under general anesthesia, using 3D intracardiac navigation, via a transseptal approach with transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) and fluoroscopic guidance. The oesophageal temperature was monitored throughout the procedure. The patient's immediate postoperative management was unremarkable, and he was discharged from the hospital on the day after the procedure with continued anticoagulant treatment and proton pump inhibitors (PPI) for gastric protection.

He was referred to the emergency department 14 days later for dyspnoea at rest and thoracic discomfort suggestive of pericardial involvement.

The EKG showed rapid AF and the laboratory work-up revealed significant signs of inflammation (C-reactive protein [CRP] > 200 mg/L and hyperleukocytosis). The patient was hemodynamically stable but had poor tolerance of the arrhythmia. The care team initiated bradycardia with beta-blockers and digoxin, without success, followed by an unsuccessful cardioversion attempt with amiodarone.

Echocardiography revealed an abundant heterogeneous pericardial effusion, which was circumferential (maximum 30 mm near the right heart chambers), and with a systolic–diastolic notch on the left atrium and significant respiratory variation of the transvalvular flow in relation to cardiac tamponade.

Pericardiocentesis was performed urgently, resulting in the removal of 400 cc of cloudy, orange pericardial fluid. Cytological analysis showed it was composed of numerous polynuclear cells, corresponding to a purulent fluid. A pericardial drain was left in place.

The patient rapidly developed hemodynamic failure with hypotension, fever, and acute respiratory failure. Laboratory results confirmed the signs of shock with acute anuric renal failure, hepatic failure, and hyperlactatemia (6 mmol/L). Echocardiography showed severe acute right ventricular dysfunction. Given the state of cardiogenic and septic shock, a broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment (piperacillin–tazobactam and amikacin flash) was started as well as inotropic support with dobutamine.

A multiphase thoracic–abdominal–pelvic CT scan was performed, revealing a minimal hydroaeric pericardial effusion (Fig. 1A). After upper-route opacification using a 1:10 diluted oral water-soluble contrast medium administered before scanning, a discontinuity in the anterior oesophageal wall was demonstrated with extraluminal contrast leakage and stagnation in the posterior portion of the cardiac mass, consistent with an oesophageal–pericardial fistula (Figs. 1B–E).Fig. 1 Thoracic–abdominal–pelvic CT scan. (A) Portal venous phase CT scan: Presence of pericardial thickening and hydroaeric pericardial effusion (arrowheads). (B) After upper-route opacification using a 1:10 diluted oral water-soluble contrast medium administered prior to an additional scan, discontinuity of the anterior oesophageal wall with contrast leakage and stagnation of ingested contrast medium in the posterior portion of the cardiac mass (arrow) is seen, suggestive of an atrio-oesophageal fistula through the pericardium. (C) Hydroaeric level with contrast medium stagnation in the pericardium (arrow). (D) Coronal oblique reconstructions with maximum intensity projection showing contrast leakage (arrowheads). (E) Axial oblique reconstructions with maximum intensity projection showing contrast leakage (arrowheads).

Fig 1

Endoscopic management was decided on. The fistulous orifice (Fig. 2A) was visualized 31 cm from the dental arches. An 18-cm covered oesophageal prosthesis was placed under fluoroscopic guidance (Fig. 2B). The final control with the injection of water-soluble contrast medium into the esophagus confirmed the good result of the procedure.Fig. 2 Endoscopic management. (A) Endoscopic view of fistulous orifice. (B) Covered oesophageal prosthesis under fluoroscopic guidance.

Fig 2

The patient's course in the intensive care unit was initially favorable with rapid extubation and weaning from amines. However, 48 hours after the procedure, there was a sudden alteration in the patient's neurological state, evaluated as 3 on the Glasgow Coma Scale. The brain CT scan revealed several ischaemic strokes of gaseous origin in the territory of the right anterior and middle cerebral artery (Fig. 3), with diffuse intraparenchymal and subarachnoid, supratentorial and subtentorial air embolism (Fig. 4A). Thoracic sections revealed the migration of the oesophageal prosthesis, with the presence of air bubbles in the left ventricle and left auricle (Fig. 4B) testifying to a fistula between the esophagus and the right superior pulmonary vein.Fig. 3 Cerebral perfusion CT. Increased TTP (time to peak) and decreased CBV (cerebral blood volume) within the territory of the right middle cerebral artery and the right anterior cerebral artery (arrowheads).

Fig 3

Fig. 4 Cerebral and thoracic CT scan after altered neurological state. (A) Intraparenchymal supratentorial air embolism (arrows). (B) Presence of air bubbles in the left ventricle (arrowheads).

Fig 4

Brain MRI performed the next day confirmed the poor prognosis due to brain damage with multiple ischaemic lesions in the supra- and infratentorial areas as a result of gas emboli, including mesencephalic involvement (Fig. 5). There was secondary diffuse supra-tentorial cerebral edema responsible for subfalcine herniation.Fig. 5 Brain apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map (diffusion-weighted MRI) decreased right frontotemporal-parietal ADC (arrowheads).

Fig 5

Given the very poor neurological prognosis, curative surgical treatment was not feasible. Brain death was declared a few hours later.

Discussion

We report a case of an atrio-oesophageal fistula as a complication of an AF catheter ablation procedure in a 66-year-old patient.

Atrio-oesophageal fistula is an exceptional but often fatal complication of AF catheter ablation procedures. According to a recent study conducted in 80% of French centers performing this procedure, the incidence of this complication remains very rare (reported rate of 0.026% per procedure) [4]. A high mortality rate of 60% was reported, although it was significantly lower in cases of surgical corrective therapy (31% vs 93%, respectively).

The first cases of this complication were described in 2004, and around 50 reports have been published to date [5,6]. Because of the low incidence of this complication, risk factors remain very difficult to assess. Ablation within the posterior wall and the amount of ablation have been mentioned as potential risk factors for atrio-oesophageal fistula development, as was the case in our patient [4].

The pathophysiology of atrio-oesophageal fistula remains poorly understood, although several hypotheses have been proposed such as direct thermal lesions on the esophagus, oesophageal ischemia via a lesion of the anterior oesophageal arteries, or nerve lesions leading to an exacerbation of gastro-oesophageal reflux and a decrease in oesophageal motility [4].

Several empirical preventive measures are implemented based on this uncertain pathophysiology. Reinforced gastric protection with PPI is systematically applied in the 3 months following the catheter ablation procedure. Oesophageal temperature monitoring via an intraoesophageal probe is also frequently used, especially when the procedure is performed under general anesthesia [7]. Despite this, the occurrence of atrio-oesophageal fistula remains unpredictable and no preventive strategy has been clearly proven to be effective. New devices have recently been developed for thermal protection of the esophagus lumen by infusing cold liquid, with the results of recent studies tending to show a significant reduction in thermal injury to the mucosa [8].

Early diagnosis and management of this complication are fundamental to reduce mortality. Thoracic CT scan completed by acquisition after upper-route opacification using a dilute water-soluble contrast medium remains the best examination. If the results are negative but there is strong clinical suspicion, the examination should be repeated [9].

Surgical management is the only curative treatment [10]. Isolated oesophageal stenting is associated with a higher mortality rate.

Conclusion

We report a case of an atrio-oesophageal fistula as a complication of an AF catheter ablation procedure in a 66-year-old patient. It is one of the rare cases described in the literature, where the initial presentation was purulent tamponade related to an oesophageal–pericardial fistula [11]. Despite preventive measures and early management of the patient, the outcome was fatal because of neurological complications.

Patient consent

The authors confirm that written consent was obtained for the submission and publication of this case, including the images.

Acknowledgments: None.

Competing Interests: None to declare.
