pmcIntroduction

Empedobacter falsenii (E. falsenii), formerly known as Wautersiella falsenii, was first described in 2006 by Kämpfer, P., et al. They found 26 isolates between 1980 and 2004 in Belgium from various human clinical samples including blood, wounds, pus, ear discharge, vaginal swab and pleural fluids [5]. After DNA sequence determination, the isolate showed 94–95 % similarity to the strain of Empedobacter brevis, and it was concluded that the former belongs to a separate genus [5]. They proposed the new genus, Wautersiella, under the family Flavobacteriaceae, where the monospecific genus Empedobacter was already a member of. It was named after Georges Wauters, a contemporary Belgian microbiologist and Enevold Falsen, a Swedish microbiologist [5]. However, in 2014, Zhang, R., et al. re-analyzed the characteristics of Wautersiella, and found that it has more similarities than differences to Empedobacter. Thus, they proposed the reclassification to Empedobacter falsenii. It is a non-motile, non-fermenting, gram negative rod, 2–3 micrometers in length, growing aerobically at 20, 30 and 37 degrees Celsius on standard media. It is oxidase-positive and catalase-positive. It is an indole-producer and urease-positive using Christensen’s broth [15].

Multiple reports of its isolation from different samples have been published. It has been isolated from a neck abscess in Argentina [10] and in a respiratory sample from a man with leukemia in Italy [3]. It has been detected in urine in the Netherlands [11], India [14], Tunisia [6] and in stool samples in Nigeria [1] and Hong Kong [13]. None of these reports described bacteremia from the organism. Although not a common cause of infection, its genome is replete with genes containing resistance to several antibiotic classes. This makes this organism a potential pathogen of concern as it may serve as a reservoir for dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes [1].

In this case report, we present a 56-year-old male with chronic left leg ulcer, liver cirrhosis, congestive heart failure and substance use disorder admitted for bacteremia, in a community hospital in the Bronx, New York. To our knowledge, this is the first case report describing bacteremia of E. falsenii. The written informed consent has been obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report, including the images. A copy of the consent is available for review by the Editor-in-chief of this journal on request.

Case report

History of present illness

A 56-year-old man presented in the emergency room complaining of “leg infection.” He stated that he has a non-healing wound on his left leg, associated with pain in both legs. He also complained of chills and subjective fevers.

On arrival, he was febrile at 103.2 degrees Fahrenheit, had a heart rate of 98 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 99 per cent on ambient air, and a mean arterial pressure of 100. He was alert and oriented to person, place and time, and was not in cardiorespiratory distress. He had no murmur or friction rub and his breath sounds were clear. The abdomen was soft, with no guarding or rigidity, but he had tenderness on deep palpation at the left lower quadrant. Both legs showed bilateral chronic venous stasis changes including hyperpigmentation, dryness, superficial scaling and edema. There was an ulcer located at left leg on the lateral surface, with clean margins, clean base and without any drainage (Fig. 1). Crepitus was not observed and both pedal pulses were appreciated. Sensation and motor function were grossly intact, with the patient able to move both his knees, feet and toes. The right knee had suprapatellar effusion, but it was not tender. The rest of the examination was unremarkable. He was admitted to medicine for cellulitis of the right leg. The quick sequential organ failure assessment score (qSOFA score) at admission was zero.Fig. 1 A. Right leg showing skin hyperpigmentation and superficial, vertical open dry wound, around 3 centimeters on anterior mid-leg. B. Left leg with skin hyperpigmentation and superficial, irregularly shaped dry wound, approximately 4 centimeters by 3 centimeters on the anterolateral mid-leg area.

Fig. 1

Past medical history

His past medical history was significant for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, stroke 12 years ago with left sided residual weakness, Childs Pugh A liver cirrhosis, history of untreated hepatitis C, heart failure with an ejection fraction of 40–45 per cent. He also had history of polysubstance use and was on methadone maintenance program. His medications were aspirin 81 milligrams daily, atorvastatin 40 milligrams daily, ferrous sulfate 325 milligrams daily, folic acid 1 milligram daily, gabapentin 300 milligrams twice a day, metoprolol succinate 50 milligrams daily, mirtazapine 15 milligrams nightly, sacubitril 24 milligrams and valsartan 26 milligrams twice a day, and thiamine 100 milligrams daily. However, the patient stated that he misses his medications on occasion. He had multiple emergency room visits and admissions for his chronic left leg ulcer. His review of chart showed that previous wound cultures grew Streptococcus epidermidis and Streptococcus pyogenes. Two weeks prior to this admission, he was admitted in another hospital for the same complaint. Blood culture at that time did not grow any organism. He was able to complete 10 days of intravenous vancomycin and was discharged to shelter once he was off antibiotics.

Social history

The patient was wheelchair bound and lived in a shelter in the Bronx, ever since his wife died. He started drinking alcohol when he was 14 years old and was drinking 10 tall cans of beer daily. His last drink was one day prior to admission. He denied smoking cigarettes. He has had opioid use disorder with heroin since the age of 24 years, initially through intranasal administration, and later through intravenous method. His last use of heroin was 2 days prior to admission.

Investigations

Initial work up in the emergency room included a complete blood count which showed normocytic, normochromic anemia and chronic thrombocytopenia. The white blood cells were within normal limits. The C-reactive protein was elevated, while lactic acid was normal. Some of the laboratory values are presented in Table 1. Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, without any acute ischemic changes. Blood cultures at two sites were obtained and patient was subsequently loaded with intravenous vancomycin and started on ampicillin – sulbactam in the emergency room. Due to persistence of abdominal tenderness, a urinalysis was sent and showed significant hematuria, but otherwise unremarkable.Table 1 Patient’s initial test results on day of admission.

Table 1	Reference Value	Reference Units	Patient’s Value	
White blood cells	4.8 – 10.8	x 103/mcL	9.74	
Red blood cells	4.7 – 6.1	x 106/mcL	2.81	
Hemoglobin	14.0 – 18.0	g/dL	8.5	
Hematocrit	42 – 52	%	25.0	
Mean corpuscular volume	80 – 99	fL	89	
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin	27 – 31	pg	30.2	
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration	29.8 – 35.2	g/dL	34	
Red cell distribution width	12 – 15	%	13.4	
Platelets	150 – 450	x 103/mcL	96	
Neutrophil %	44 – 70	%	86.2	
Lymphocyte %	20 – 45	%	6.4	
Sodium	136–145	Mmol/L	134	
Potassium	3.5 – 5.1	Mmol/L	5.0	
Chloride	98 – 107	Mmol/L	99	
Carbon Dioxide	22 – 29	Mmol/L	21	
Blood Urea Nitrogen	6 – 23	Mg/dL	11	
Creatinine	0.7 – 1.2	Mg/dL	0.87	
Glucose	74–109	Mg/dL	120	
Calcium	8.4 – 10.5	Mg/dL	8.3	
Prothrombin Time	10 – 13	Seconds	13.7	
International normalized ratio		Mg/dL	1.2	
Partial Thromboplastin Time	25.0 – 35.3	Seconds	30.3	
Albumin	3.5 – 5.2	g/dL	3.2	
Alkaline Phosphatase	40 – 130	U/L	109	
Alanine aminotransferase	<= 41	U/L	17	
Aspartate aminotransferase	<= 40	U/L	48	
C-Reactive Protein	0 – 5	Mg/L	79.1	
Creatine Kinase	20 – 200	U/L	174	
Lactic Acid	0.5 – 2.2	Mmol/L	1.0	
Urinalysis				
 pH	5 – 8		8.5	
 Color			Yellow, clear	
 Glucose	Negative		Negative	
 Ketones	Negative		Negative	
 Specific gravity	1.01 – 1.025		1.011	
 Red blood cells	0 – 4	/HPF	543	
 White blood cells	0 – 5	/HPF	2	
 Bacteria	Negative		Negative	
 Leukocyte esterase	Negative		Negative	
 Squamous Cells	0 – 5	/HPF	1	

Imaging studies revealed no deep venous thrombosis on bilateral lower extremity ultrasound. Chest radiograph showed normal lung parenchyma and osseous structures. Radiography of the right lower extremity showed severe joint space narrowing of the knee with small suprapatellar joint effusion. Radiography of the left lower extremity showed moderate degenerative changes of the knee with suprapatellar joint effusion, subcutaneous emphysema at the lateral aspect of the leg, overlying the soft tissue ulcer. A computed tomogram of his abdomen and pelvis showed bibasilar atelectasis, coronary artery atherosclerosis, cardiomegaly, nodular contour and enlargement of the liver suggestive of cirrhosis, mild splenomegaly, presence of splenorenal and gastric varices, and degenerative changes at L5 – S1 level. On day 4 of admission, blood cultures from both aerobic bottles came back positive for Empedobacter falsenii / tilapiae (Fig. 2), the sensitivities of which showed multidrug resistance (Table 2). Urine culture showed no growth and swab culture of the left leg ulcer grew vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis.Fig. 2 A set of bactec bottles (aerobic and anaerobic) were incubated in the bactec instrument at 35 degrees. The Aerobic bottle flagged positive after 13 h and 46 min of incubation. Gram stain was performed and showed gram negative rods. A Blood Panel PCR was run using the Biofire Film array instrument (Torch) which did not detect any targets. The blood sample was sub-cultured using the Kiestra total lab automated instrument (TLA) to Blood (A), Chocolate (B) and MacConkey (C) agar. After 12–18 h of incubation, there was growth of non-hemolytic gray colonies. The organism grew on all 3 medias. An isolate was tested using Bruker MALDI TOF which identified the isolate as Empedobacter falsenii / tilapiae with a score of 2.27.

Fig. 2

Table 2 Sensitivities of Empedobacter falsenii from 2 separate sites of blood culture from the patient.

Table 2Antibiotic	Minimum Inhibitory Concentration	Sensitivity	
Amikacin	>32	Resistant	
Amoxicillin / Clavulanate	>16 / 8	Resistant	
Ampicillin	16	Resistant	
Ampicillin / Sulbactam	>16 /8	Resistant	
Aztreonam	>16	Resistant	
Cefazolin	>16	Resistant	
Cefepime	4	Sensitive	
Cefotaxime	32	Intermediate	
Cefoxitin	<= 8	Sensitive	
Ceftazidime	>16	Resistant	
Ceftriaxone	>32	Resistant	
Cefuroxime	>16	Resistant	
Ciprofloxacin	>2	Resistant	
Ertapenem	>1	Resistant	
Gentamicin	8	Resistant	
Levofloxacin	2	Resistant	
Meropenem	>8	Resistant	
Minocyclin	<= 4	Sensitive	
Piperacillin / Tazobactam	>64	Resistant	
Tigecycline	<= 2	Sensitive	
Tobramycin	>8	Resistant	
Trimethoprim / Sulfamethoxazole	<= 0.5 / 9.5	Sensitive	

Management

He received a dose of vancomycin and ampicillin - sulbactam in the emergency room. But since the wound did not look infected, he was started on broad spectrum piperacillin – tazobactam on the medicine floors. Urology was consulted for the hematuria, and recommended to send for urine cytology, prostate specific antigen levels and to begin tamsulosin. Wound care service recommended to cleanse the chronic left leg ulcer with normal saline and to apply XeroForm occlusive gauze, foam dressing and Kerlix wrap daily. Orthopedics were called to evaluate the suprapatellar effusions, and recommended the patient to wear compressive knee support on both knees, application of ice packs, elevation of lower extremities and careful weight bearing as tolerated. Once the blood culture showed Empedobacter and sensitivities were complete, infectious disease service recommended shifting to intravenous cefepime for 7–10 days. His fever defervesced on day 2 and he stayed afebrile during the rest of his stay. He continued to improve during his admission and he was eventually sent home on oral trimethoprim – sulfamethoxazole to complete for 7 days more, in accordance with infectious disease recommendation as well.

Post-admission course

He missed his follow up infectious disease appointment. Approximately 1 month after discharge, patient was admitted to another hospital for left lower extremity cellulitis and urinary tract infection. Urine culture grew highly susceptible Klebsiella pneumoniae, thus infectious disease service recommended levofloxacin for 5 days. He was eventually discharged after completing oral antibiotics. Approximately 2 months after discharge, he presented to our hospital again, and was admitted in medical intensive care unit for acute hypoxemic respiratory failure complicated with pneumonia, septic shock and encephalopathy. Blood culture grew moderately resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae, while bronchial aspirate culture grew multi-drug resistant Staphylococcus aureus.

Discussion

Empedobacter falsenii is characterized as a non-fermenting gram-negative pathogen reported in only a few cases of human infections [3], [6], [10], [14]. With advancements in microbiological techniques such as matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI TOF) this bacterium has become more easily identifiable [14]. Though reports are rare, the importance of the study of E. falsenii is embedded in its patterns of antibiotic resistance. One of the clinical factors of significance of this organism is its ability to transfer resistance patterns to other pathogens, for example conferring resistance to beta-lactamases [10].

In our patient, the E. falsenii isolate was identified by polymerase chain reaction assay and was found to be resistant to several antibiotics. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a global health and development threat [12]. In 2021, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in conjunction with the University of Utah School of Medicine estimated that six antibiotic threats contributed more than $ 4.6 billion in health care costs annually [9]. These included: vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus, carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter species, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales, extended-spectrum cephalosporin resistance in Enterobacterales, and multi-drug resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa [9]. There are more than 2.8 million AMR infections annually, which result to 35,000 deaths [9]. In light of these facts, studying the AMR patterns of bacteria, whether common or rare, becomes important in reducing health care cost, morbidity and mortality among patients.

In 2018, Collins et al. conducted a study on the distinct features and presence of a novel metallo-ß-lactamase (EBR-2) in E. falsenii [2]. In this study, E. falsenii strain Wf282 was isolated from an 18-year-old patient with acute otitis media and its genome was sequenced. Antibiotic resistance genes found were identified as putative beta-lactamases including a novel metallo-ß-lactamase (EBR-2), efflux pumps belonging to the Resistance Nodulation Division (RND) superfamily, and tripartite multidrug resistance systems including non-RND and non-multi-antimicrobial extrusion protein, efflux pump systems [2]. The novel carbapenemase, named EBR-2, showed its highest affinity for penicillin G, meropenem and ampicillin [2]. In this study ERB-2 carbapenemase was also found to have a higher catalytic activity for meropenem, ampicillin and penicillin G in comparison to EBR-1, IND-1 and NDM-1 beta-lactamases [2].

In 2019, Zeng et al. conducted a genetic analysis on E. falsenii obtained from a stool sample. It was determined to have a 3738606 base pair chromosome and a 19650 base pair plasmid designated as p1681–1-tetX [13]. He reported genetic characteristics of a clinical E. falsenii strain, which was found to be resistant to several last line antibiotics. It was speculated to have intrinsic resistance to colistin, carbapenem resistance through chromosomal blaEBR-2, tigecycline resistance through tet(X) variant on non-conjugated plasmid [13].

Olowo-okere, A., et al. discovered another novel variant of metallo-β-lactamase, blaEBR-4, which was found in an isolate of E. falsenii from a stool sample in 2022 obtained in a tertiary healthcare facility in Sokoto, Nigeria. It was the 4th member of the blaEBR metallo-β-lactamase family which have all been found in the genus Empedobacter [1].

Though resistance patterns are being studied, little is known about the epidemiology of E. falsenii. This bacterium has been isolated from various clinical specimens. It has also been isolated from metalworking fluids and aeorosols [8], tiled carpet surface of hospitals [4], soils, polluted sediments and rodent skins [7]. Our patient had a lower limb ulcer, for which he has had multiple hospitalizations. His recent hospitalization 2 weeks prior to the current admission may have contributed to his infection with the organism, but the cause in this case is inconclusive. This is the first case of E. falsenii bacteremia reported in the literature that we have been able to find. There is much to be studied concerning this bacterium. We hope to bring awareness of its presence in our environment and promote the study of this bacteria adding to the limited literature that is currently available.

Funding

No sources of funding to declare.

Ethical approval

All ethical issues have been considered to protect the patient’s rights.

Consent

Written Informed consent has been obtained.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Dr. Vince Martinez: Main author, Introduction, Final manuscript. Dr. Maria Angela Matabang: Data collection, Case details. Dr. Dwayvania Miller: Case discussion. Dr. Richa Aggarwal: Attending physician and consultant. Dr. Alexander LaFortune: Infectious disease consultant.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Northwell Health Microbiology Laboratories for providing the images of the culture.

Conflicts of Interest Statment

The authors do not have any conflicts of interest to declare.
