pmcLearning points

This case highlights that Capnocytophaga canimorsus endocarditis, although very rare, can be very aggressive, with high frequency of valve destruction and need for surgery.

It can also affect young individuals with no predisposing factors and no previous heart disease.

Introduction

Capnocytophaga canimorsus is a Gram-negative bacillus, present in the oral microbiota of dogs, capable of causing infections such as fulminant sepsis or meningitis. It has also been described as a rare cause of endocarditis.1,2 It has been reported that asplenic, immune-compromised, or alcoholic patients are particularly at risk, but infection by this microorganism can also occur in young, healthy individuals with no known previous diseases.1 We present a case of native aortic valve endocarditis due to this microorganism, complicated with aortic root pseudoaneurysm and left ventricle-to-right atrium fistula (Gerbode defect).

Timeline

Day 1	Admission to hospital due to intermittent fever, moderate exertion dyspnoea, and orthopnoea.
Systolic murmurs in aortic and pulmonary areas, previously unknown. High C-reactive protein, leucocytosis, and neutrophilia in blood tests.
Empiric antibiotic therapy started.	
Day 2	Transoesophageal echocardiography → 5 mm vegetation attached to the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve, severe aortic regurgitation, aortic root abscess, and left ventricle-to-right atrium fistula.
Blood cultures → Capnocytophaga canimorsus.
Ceftriaxone started.	
Day 3	Surgery → aortic valve replacement with a biological prosthesis, closure of the fistula.	
Day 15	Worsening of patient’s general condition.
Computed tomography and transthoracic echocardiography → acute mediastinitis, pericardial abscess, and cardiac tamponade.
Emergency surgery.	
Day 20	Patient exits intensive care unit after second surgery.
Pericardial abscess culture → Enterococcus faecalis.
Ampicillin added to therapy.	
Day 38	Patient discharged after 36 days of ceftriaxone, 24 days of metronidazole, and 19 days of ampicillin.
Antibiotic therapy to be finished under outpatient regimen.	

Case presentation

A 39-year-old male was admitted with a 2 month history of intermittent fever up to 39°C, later on becoming daily, 1 week moderate exertion dyspnoea, and 24 h orthopnoea. He had no relevant personal history other than occasional smoking and alcohol consumption and had no regular medical treatment. He denied lower limb swelling, palpitations, dizziness, or syncope. Likewise, he denied weight loss or symptoms suggestive of constitutional syndrome.

On physical examination, the patient presented an acceptable general condition, with mild tachypnoea at rest. Vital signs at admission showed a temperature of 36.9°C, a blood pressure of 129/40 mmHg, and a heart rate of 105 b.p.m., and blood oxygen saturation was 96% with no need of oxygen therapy. Cardiopulmonary auscultation revealed previously unknown diastolic murmurs in both aortic and pulmonary areas, with slight crackles in both lung bases. Upon inspection, no skin alterations were observed, and the oropharyngeal cavity was normal. The abdomen was soft and depressible, not painful on palpation, without masses or megalia. There was no oedema in the lower limbs.

Blood tests revealed elevated C-reactive protein (87 mg/L; normal range < 5 mg/L), leucocytosis (16 610 × 109/L, normal range 4.00–11.5 × 109/L), neutrophilia (12 810 × 109/L, normal range 1.80–8.00 × 109/L), and anaemia (haemoglobin 10.8 g/dL, normal range 13.0–17.5 g/dL). The electrocardiogram had no significant findings. Chest X-ray showed mild bilateral pleural effusion and right basal atelectasis.

He was admitted to the Internal Medicine department with an initial diagnosis of unknown origin fever and first episode of heart failure, with suspicion of infective endocarditis. Blood cultures were extracted, and empirical antibiotic therapy with piperacillin–tazobactam was started.

Transthoracic echocardiography showed a moderately dilated left ventricle (biplane end-diastolic volume 252 mL), with preserved ejection fraction (62% estimated by Simpson’s biplane method). Right atrium and right ventricle had a normal size, with normal function of the right ventricle (tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 24 mm and tricuspid annulus S′ wave 14 cm/s in tissue doppler imaging). A mild tricuspid regurgitation was found, with a peak velocity of 297 cm/s, with and estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP) of 40 mmHg. The most notable finding was a severe aortic regurgitation with a wide central jet that exceeded the anterior mitral valve plane, with a pressure half-time of 117 ms. Likewise, images suggestive of vegetation in the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve, and aortic root pseudoaneurysm with left ventricle-to-right atrium fistula, were observed. Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed the presence of a 5 mm vegetation, attached to the ventricular face of the non-coronary aortic cusp. Likewise, an 18 × 7 mm periannular pseudoaneurysm and a subaortic left ventricle-to-right atrium fistula, immediately superior to the tricuspid valve (Gerbode defect), were detected (Figures 1–4, see Supplementary material online, videos S1–S3).

Figure 1 Transoesophageal echocardiogram, 0° mid-oesophageal view, showing a 5 mm image (ellipse) attached to the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve, highly suggestive of vegetation.

Figure 2 Transoesophageal echocardiogram, 3D reconstruction, showing an aortic periannular pseudoaneurysm (arrow).

Figure 3 Transoesophageal echocardiogram, 115° mid-oesophageal view, showing severe aortic regurgitation (upper arrow) and a subaortic left ventricle-to-right atrium fistula, immediately superior to the tricuspid valve (lower arrow).

Figure 4 Transoesophageal echocardiogram, 45° short axis view, showing blood inflow inside the periannular pseudoaneurysm with colour Doppler (ellipse) and the fistula to the right atrium (arrow).

Gram-negative bacilli grew in two sets of blood cultures, subsequently identified as C. canimorsus. The patient recognized having a suffered bite on the lower right limb by a friend’s dog 4 months earlier. In addition, he owned a correctly vaccinated pet dog. Antibiotic therapy was then switched to ceftriaxone 2 g/12 h for 8 weeks, subsequently adding metronidazole 500 mg/8 h for 4 weeks, due to persistent fever, after sensitivity to this drug was demonstrated through the antibiogram.

After discussion by the Heart Team, urgent surgical treatment was decided. The vegetation was attached to the ventricular side of the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve. A 10 mm defect was present next to the non-coronary cusp, connecting aorta and left ventricle to right atrium. The aortic root had a diameter of 18 mm. First, aortic root enlargement was performed following Nicks procedure, which consists of an aortotomy that involves the non-coronary sinus through the aortic annulus into the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. Then, a bovine pericardial patch was used to reconstruct the aortic defect. The fistula was repaired using the same bovine pericardial patch. Afterwards, the native aortic valve was replaced with a Perimount Magna Ease (Edwards) n°21 biological prosthesis. After aortic declamping, significant bleeding was detected through the portion of the pericardial patch that was used to repair the fistula, leading to re-establishment of extracorporeal circulation for revision and reinforcement of the sutures. After the second declamping, no leaks were detected through the patch, and the surgery was finished with no further complications. The patient was then admitted to intensive care unit for post-operative care.

The patient’s early post-operative period was unremarkable. Post-operative echocardiogram showed normal function of the biological prosthesis. However, persistence of the left ventricle-to-right atrium fistula was detected (see Supplementary material online, videos S4 and S5), due to a dehiscence of the pericardial patch. The fistula showed haemodynamic signs of restriction to blood flow, with a peak velocity of 4.7 m/s, a peak gradient of 89 mmHg, and a Qp/Qs ratio of 1.2.

On post-operative day +12, the patient suffered worsening of his general condition, with low-grade fever and profuse sweating. On inspection, purulent secretion was seen in the insertion region of the temporary pacemaker leads implanted during surgery. A thoracic computed tomography was performed, showing severe anterior pericardial effusion with right ventricle compromise, and findings compatible with acute mediastinitis. A bedside transthoracic echocardiogram (Figure 5) showed severe anterior pericardial effusion, with diastolic collapse of the right heart cavities and pathological respiratory variations of transvalvular flows, compatible with haemodynamic repercussion. Therefore, the patient underwent emergency surgery to drain the pericardial effusion and anterior mediastinal abscess. Enterococcus faecalis grew in the culture of the purulent material, so ampicillin 500 mg/6 h was added to antibiotic therapy.

Figure 5 Transthoracic echocardiogram, four-chamber subxiphoid view, showing severe anterior pericardial effusion with collapse of the right heart cavities, and a hyperechoic image suggesting a pericardial abscess.

Post-operative evolution was satisfactory, with progressive clinical improvement. Control computed tomography angiography performed 2 weeks later showed resolution of mediastinitis, with no residual pericardial effusion. It was decided not to reoperate to close the fistula during this admission, and he was discharged to finish antibiotic therapy with oral drugs (metronidazole 500 mg/8 h for 4 more days after discharge and linezolid 600 mg/12 h for 2 weeks after discharge). In subsequent check-ups, the patient has showed improvement of his clinical condition, with no fever, no symptoms or signs of heart failure, and normal physical activity.

Discussion

Capnocytophaga canimorsus is a common commensal Gram-negative bacillus in the oral flora of dogs. Infection by this microorganism is contracted by bite, scratches, or mere exposure to these animals. It is capable of causing a variety of infections in humans, such as fulminant sepsis and meningitis, and it is also a very rare cause of infective endocarditis.1,2 Infections by this bacillus have been described typically in patients with anatomical or functional asplenia or in alcoholic patients, but they can also occur in previously healthy individuals.1

To date, 25 cases of C. canimorsus endocarditis have been described in the literature,1–13 with higher frequency in men (69.5%), with a mean age of 54.2 years. It most commonly affects native valves, mainly aortic, followed by the tricuspid and mitral valves. Two cases of endocarditis on mechanical aortic prostheses have been described, one on a cardiac implantable defibrillator lead in the right cavities3 and one case of superinfection of a right atrial myxoma.9

None of the patients in the cases described had functional or anatomical asplenia, neither did our patient. Furthermore, he had no known previous diseases and no structural heart disease. This supports the idea that infections by C. canimorsus can affect healthy individuals with none of the classically described risk factors. Of these risk factors, the most frequent was alcohol consumption, which was present in our patient. In most cases, previous contact with dogs has been documented, associating bites in 32% of them.1–13 Our patient had been bitten by a friend’s dog and also owned a pet dog himself.

This infection, although rare, can be very aggressive, with high degree of damage to the heart structures. It frequently causes severe valvular regurgitations, and cases of paravalvular abscesses and two aorta-to-right atrium fistulas have been described.4,14 Given the great damage and destruction of native valves in these cases, necessity of surgery is very common, and mortality described so far is considerable, 16% of cases. In our patient, the infection caused considerable damage to the aortic valve and annulus, leading to severe acute aortic regurgitation, creation of a fistula with the right atrium, and development of heart failure, thus leading to urgent surgery. Prompt diagnosis and surgical management were essential for a good outcome.

As C. canimorsus endocarditis is uncommon, antibiotic therapy of choice in these cases and its duration is not well established nowadays. Being a potentially life-threatening condition, empirical antibiotic therapy is often initiated before the causative agent is identified,10 and many cases are successfully treated with empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. Once the microorganism is identified, beta-lactams are the most commonly used antibiotic treatment, mainly penicillin and ceftriaxone. The use of meropenem is also common. Initially, we chose to start piperacillin–tazobactam as a broad spectrum therapy until knowing the results of the blood cultures. So far, no cases of resistance to beta-lactams have been documented in cases of endocarditis, although it has been reported that beta-lactamase-producing strains of C. canimorsus are increasing notably.2 In our case, antibiotic resistance was not demonstrated. This is why we chose ceftriaxone as a therapy once the germ was identified, later adding metronidazole as it was demonstrated not to be resistant. In our case, blood cultures were enough to identify the infective agent. However, microbiological diagnosis can sometimes be difficult due to the bacillus’ slow growth, with no dismissible frequency of negative cultures. This is why other complementary techniques, such as 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing and matrix-assisted desorption/ionization and time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF), have been used in some cases.2

Therefore, we present a case of infective endocarditis due to a very rare causal agent in a young patient with no previous diseases or predisposing factors (except contact with a dog), and with an also rare complication, such as Gerbode defect.

Supplementary Material

ytad228_Supplementary_Data Click here for additional data file.

Lead author biography

Daniel Salazar is a fourth year cardiology resident currently working at the Regional Hospital of Málaga. He studied medicine at the University of Málaga. His main interests are cardiac imaging and advanced heart failure.

Supplementary material

Supplementary material is available at European Heart Journal – Case Reports.

Slide sets: A fully edited slide set detailing this case and suitable for local presentation is available online as Supplementary data.

Consent: The authors confirm that written consent for submission and publication of this case report, including images and associated text, has been obtained from the patient in line with COPE guidance.

Funding: None declared.

Data availability

The data underlying this article are available in the article and in its online Supplementary material.
