pmc1. Introduction

Adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma (ATLL) is a malignancy of mature T lymphocytes. It is caused by chronic human T-lymphotropic virus, type I (HTLV-I) infection.1 An intractable, systemic disease, it involves the peripheral blood, lymph nodes, and/or the skin. Skin involvement in ATLL ranges from 39% to 57%. Chronic and smoldering subtypes of ATLL present with more frequent cutaneous involvements.2 Often, ATLL can present with only skin involvement which can present as a diagnostic dilemma. In the United States, more than 80% of patients with cutaneous-first presentations of ATLL got a diagnosis of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. 3 Rare cutaneous presentations can further obscure the diagnosis.

Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG), an ulcerative and inflammatory condition of the skin, is a rare neutrophilic dermatosis.4 We present a case of ATLL that had lesions of PG at the outset. To our knowledge, there are no reported cases of ATLL presenting as PG.

2. Case report

A 64-year-old Caribbean male with known diabetes was admitted with worsening skin lesions and concerns for sepsis—making lesions suspicious for abscesses, which appeared rapidly over a few weeks. He had not visited his primary care physician’s office prior to presentation. On presentation, the patient was hemodynamically stable except for tachycardia to 130 beats per minute. On examination, the scalp had many scattered pustules and crusted papules. Atrophic cribriform plaques at various stages of healing were seen on thigh and chest. Slit-like ulcerations with irregular borders were present in axilla bilaterally without any tracts or subcutaneous nodulations; axillary lymphadenopathy was present. The finger lesion present on the right third phalanx had jagged red to purplish ulcerations with overhanging borders and overlying peripheral erythema and tenderness.

The patient was empirically treated with vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam along with intravenous fluids. Initial workup showed leukocytosis of 15,000/μL with neutrophilic predominance (there was no previous documentation of chronic leukocytosis), elevated inflammatory markers with high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) of 31.56 mg/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 546IU/mL, mild transaminitis, and blood cultures with no growth; rest of the workup, including electrolytes, were normal. Punch biopsy was performed from the border of the ulcers on the finger, scalp [Fig. 1], and upper thigh. Bacterial (including mycobacterial), fungal, and viral cultures of the biopsy showed no growth. Biopsy from finger showed ulcerative dermatitis with sub-adjacent neutrophilic infiltrate concerning for early stages of pyoderma gangrenosum.

The patient was discharged with close follow-ups with prednisone taper, clobetasol, and doxycycline. On later follow-up, our patient satisfied Delphi consensus criteria for PG as he had biopsy-proven neutrophilic infiltrate of the ulcer edge, rapid progression of skin lesions, peripheral erythema, undermined borders, and tenderness at ulceration site, multiple ulcerations, and cribriform scars at sites of healed ulcers. However, biopsy results from the thigh and scalp returned with another finding showing intraepidermal vesicular dermatitis with atypical lymphoid infiltrate. The lymphocytes had atypia and CD25 positivity. Immunostaining for these atypical cells showed positivity for CD2, CD3, CD5, CD25, and negative ALK1, CD8, CD20, CD34 [Fig. 2A–E].

These findings were correlated with flow-cytometry and HTLV1/2 levels, given suspicion of a T-cell lymphoma as a possible cause of pyoderma gangrenosum. A battery of tests showed negative autoimmune panel, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), rapid plasma reagin (RPR), hepatitis serologies, Quantiferon assay, and urine and protein electrophoresis showing polyclonal gammopathy with no monoclonal band on fixation. HTLV1/2 serology came back positive with elevated interleukin-2 (IL2) receptor levels; flow cytometry was consistent with ATLL showing CD4+/CD25+/CD7-cells.

During outpatient workup, the patient developed altered mental status with severe hypercalcemia—corrected calcium was 17.8 mg/dL, unresponsive to aggressive hydration and multiple doses of calcitonin and was upgraded to critical care. Hypercalcemia was non-parathyroid hormone dependent, and the patient was given zoledronic acid with eventual improvement. During treatment, the patient developed hypoxic respiratory failure with disseminated intravascular coagulopathy requiring emergent intubation. Imaging done for the sake of diagnosis, including positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT) scan showed extensive organ-system lymphomatous involvement in lungs, spleen, kidneys, diaphragm, and scalp with multi-level lymphadenopathy including axillary/chest wall, retroperitoneal, pelvic, and cervical chains [Fig. 3]. Given rapid decompensation, goals of care were discussed, the patient was made full comfort care, and eventually passed away.

3. Discussion

We described a case of ATLL with skin-first presentation. The patient’s skin lesion was consistent with PG and eventually went on to be diagnosed with ATLL—an association not previously reported in the medical literature to our knowledge. PG is associated with a wide range of systemic diseases—a retrospective cohort study showed 45% patients had co-morbidities; 6% of the patients had hematologic malignancies.5 Among hematological malignancies, PG was found to be most commonly associated with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) followed be monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance and acute myeloid leukemia.6

About one third to half of patients with ATLL present with cutaneous involvement. At the time of diagnosis of ATLL, 35% had nodules or tumor, 24% each had papules or plaques, 12% had patches, and 6% had erythroderma.3 A study in the US found that 82% of ATLL patients presenting with skin-first lesions were initially diagnosed as other pathologies. The median delay in diagnosing them with ATLL was 3.7 months.3 The study also found that 94% of the patients were from the Caribbean.3 Skin-first presentations in ATLL can lead the physician towards alternate diagnoses. Most patients received the diagnosis of mycosis fungoides. Other differential diagnoses entertained include Sezary syndrome, peripheral T-cell lymphomas not otherwise specified, and T-prolymphocytic leukemia involving the skin.

In the US, ATLL should be suspected in patients who come from HTLV-1 endemic regions and have nodulotumoral skin lesions that appear early while entertaining the diagnosis of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). Cutaneous lesions associated with ATLL have pathological features of Sezary syndrome or mycosis fungoides. It is especially important to consider ATLL when CTCL is not consistent with other well-recognized lymphomas. ATLL can be diagnosed by immunophenotype or histopathology of the tumors or peripheral blood, cytology of peripheral blood, and HTLV-1 serology. A Western blot can confirm HTLV-1 infection if enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay is positive. PCR demonstration of insertion of HTLV-1 DNA into the tumor DNA can give the definite diagnosis.7

In our patient, who fulfilled the Delphi consensus for PG, a diagnosis for ATLL was a farfetched one. The art of medicine is full of clinical uncertainties; uncommon presentation can lead a physician to a cascade of false positives, incidental findings, diagnostic uncertainties and ultimately delayed care.

Fig. 1 Scattered pustules and papules in the scalp.

Fig. 2 Thigh Punch Biopsy:

H&E shows subepidermal vesicular dermatitis with atypical lymphoid infiltrate (A. 100x, B. 400x). The atypical lymphocytes are CD3 and CD4-positive T-cells (C and D, in order) with CD7 downregulation (E).

Fig. 3 PET/CT showing diffuse metabolic activity in the spleen (Panel 1), lungs (Panel 2), and the scalp (Panel 3).

Conflicts of interest

The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
