pmc1 Introduction

Fournier's Gangrene is a severe and rapidly progressing necrotic infection of the skin and fascia that can affect external genitals, perineum, anus, tissue of the retroperitoneal space, abdominal wall, and the surface of both lower and upper limbs [1]. The diagnosis of Fournier's gangrene is made on the basis of symptoms which include fever, severe pain, extensive redness and edema of the skin, sometimes with blisters filled with serous content, and subcutaneous crepitations [6]. The treatment of Fournier's Gangrene includes surgical removal of infected and necrotic tissues, antibiotic therapy with wide coverage, shock prophylaxis, and supporting treatment: Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy (HBOT) and Negative Pressure Wound Therapy (NPWT) [1,3,13]. This case of Fournier's Gangrene was particularly challenging due to the patient's multiple pre-existing comorbidities, including alcohol use disorder, stage 2 chronic kidney disease, and hepatitis B. Those multiple issues had to be taken into consideration throughout the entire hospitalization, increasing the risk of sudden decompensation and patient's death [12].

The majority of the patient's treatment was done in a community hospital, with remote coordination with the Hyperbaric Medicine Center. This case gives a unique perspective on how to effectively manage such a complicated infection in a smaller community hospital. The key to successful treatment is interdisciplinary communication and coordination between multiple medical specialists, including surgeons and plastic surgeons, internists and intensivists, clinical microbiologists, and HBOT specialists.

This case report has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria [11].

2 Presentation of case

A 34 year old male patient was admitted to the Internal Medicine Department of a local community hospital because of increasing edema of the whole body. Upon admission the patient's hygiene was extremely poor, and he was not taking any medications. His past medical history included cirrhosis in the course of alcohol use disorder, hypertension, hepatitis B, macrocytic anemia, moderate mitral valve regurgitation, previous Clostridium Difficile infection, and stage 2 hypertensive chronic kidney disease with previous episodes of acute renal failure.

The patient initially presented with sepsis and extensive edema of the lower body. The patient was conscious, with verbal-logical contact preserved. Wheezing and rhonchi over the lung fields were present, along with dullness at the base of the left lung, and a loud mitral regurgitation murmur. The blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg, the heart rate was 100 bpm, and body temperature was 38.0C. Lab results were significant for: WBC 10.0 × 103/ul; HBG 8.1 g/dl; HCT 25.6 %; PLT 139 × 103/ul; CRP 124 mg/l; Creatinine: 1.83 mg/dl; Potassium 4.10 mmol/l; Sodium 130 mmol/l; Albumin 2.5 g/dl, ALT 49 u/l, AST 110 u/l; INR 1.33. The chest X-ray showed fluid in the pleural cavity. CT abdomen/pelvis was performed and showed extensive edema of subcutaneous tissue of the lower abdomen and pelvis, negative for an abscess at that time. An echocardiogram confirmed the presence of Mitral Regurgitation with preserved ejection fraction and no other deficits.

Initial empiric antibiotic therapy of Ceftazidime was modified to Imipenem/Cilastatin and Vancomycin after blood cultures grew Staphylococcus Epidermidis and wound cultures grew multiple pathogens described in the table below. Over the course of the patient's stay in the surgical ward, skin cultures were collected four times as described in the table. Antibiotic dosage was adjusted to Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) and dialysis. Antibiotic therapy was continued throughout the patient's entire hospitalization. The patient was started on TPN on the 3rd day after admission. Vasopressor support with Norepinephrine was employed as needed to a Mean Arterial Pressure goal of equal to or above 65 (Table 1).Table 1 Wound culture results.

Table 1Culture	Bacteria	
Wound culture # 1 initial resection of necrotic tissue	Enterobacter Cloacae +++, Escherichia Coli +++, Enterococcus Faecalis +. Sensitive to Imipenem and Gentamicin.	
Wound culture # 2 initial resection of necrotic tissue	Enterococcus Faecium VRE +1; Escherischia Coli +++; Enterobacter Cloacae +++. Sensitive to Gentamicin.	
Wound culture # 3 application of NPWT dressing	Acinetobacter Baumannii +++, Klebsiella Pneumoniae ESBL +++. Sensitive to Imipenem.	
Wound culture # 4 last devitalization	Proteus Vulgaris +++. Sensitive to Ceftazidime.	

In addition to the edema, the skin of the patient's skin of the lower abdomen, scrotum, right and left lower limb, and right upper limb suddenly presented first with petechiae, then with bursting blisters oozing with serous content and secondary necrotic changes. The patient also complained of pain with movement and palpation in those areas. The characteristic symptoms and necrotic skin changes lead to the diagnosis of Fournier's Gangrene and transfer to the surgical ward.

Due to prolonged septic shock, the patient developed acute renal failure with minimal urine production. On day 5 of the hospital stay, the first session of continuous veno-venous hemodialysis (CVVHD) was initiated. In total, four sessions of hemodialysis were required during the disease process, two sessions before the first necrosectomy and two sessions after the first necrosectomy.

The patient underwent the first necrosectomy on day 7 of hospitalization with successful removal of the necrotic skin and subcutaneous tissue of the scrotum, lower abdomen, lower extremities, right upper extremity, and phimosis. He scored 7 on the Fournier Gangrene Severity Index (FGSI) indicating low severity at that time. He underwent a second necrosectomy on day 16 with further removal of devitalized tissue and application of sterile dressing with antiseptic solutions including Grassolind, Chlorhexidine, Octenisept, Microdacyn dressings.

After the second necrosectomy, the patient was transported to a quaternary care center for Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy (HBOT). Thirteen sessions of HBOT were done in total over 7 days. During the hospitalization there was also one episode of epistaxis from the right nasal sinus, treated with anterior tamponade (Fig. 1).Fig. 1 The patient's condition after HBOT.

Fig. 1

After completion of HBOT, the patient was transferred back to the community hospital. In order to stimulate tissue granulation and prepare the patient for skin transplant, Negative Pressure Wound Therapy (NPWT) was started. The dressing was applied on the lower abdomen, right thigh and the anterior surface of the left thigh under general anesthesia, preceded by further removal of devitalized tissue (Fig. 2).Fig. 2 Negative pressure dressing applied.

Fig. 2

The negative pressure dressings were fully sealed for over 3 days. There was discharge of serous-blood content from the wound at the rate of approximately 600 ml/24 h. 800 ml containers were used, necessitating a change of container every 24 h. The negative pressure device was set to intermittent mode, with a longer active phase (4 min), and a shorter resting phase (3 min) with pressures of 100 mmHg and 125 mmHg respectively. NPWT was deployed for 16 days total and the foam was changed 4 times (Fig. 3).Fig. 3 After completion of NPWT.

Fig. 3

After removal of the negative pressure dressings, the patient's treatment was continued with standard sterile dressings impregnated with moisturizing and antimicrobial agents. The amount of granulation tissue and wound clearance was achieved to a satisfactory level. The patient was qualified for skin transplant by a plastic surgeon.

Unfortunately, after initial improvement the patient's condition worsened on the 33rd day of hospitalization. His CRP and leukocytes acutely increased. Blood and urine cultures were repeated, and both were positive for Escrichia Coli, indicating urosepsis. Despite antibiotic therapy with Imipenem and vasopressor support, the patient suffered sudden cardiac arrest and passed away (Table 2).Table 2 Timeline of the events.

Table 2Timeline of the events	
Number of days since admission	Event	
Day 1–16	Day 3: initiation of TPN
Dialysis during day: 5, 8, 11, 14
Day 7: first necrosectomy and application of sterile dressings (FGSI: 7)
Day 16: second necrosectomy	
Day 17–23	Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy (HBOT).	
Day 23–39	The negative pressure dressing was applied to the lower abdomen, right thigh and the anterior surface of the left thigh. The remaining wounds were covered with sterile dressings (NWPT) on the following days:
23 (NWPT 1)
28 (NWPT 2)
33 (NWPT 3)
39 (NWPT 4)	
Day 33	Decompensation due to urosepsis.	
Day 40	Patient's death due to prolonged septic shock and sudden cardiac arrest.	
TPN: Total Parenteral Nutrition; UFGS scale: Uludag Fournier's Gangrene Scale; HBOT: Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy; NPWT: Negative Pressure Wound Therapy.

3 Discussion

Fournier's Gangrene is a particularly severe and rapidly progressing necrotic infection of the skin and fascia that can affect external genitals, perineum, anus, tissue of the retroperitoneal space, abdominal wall, and the surface of both lower and upper limbs. The infection is caused by mixed aerobic and anaerobic bacterial flora acting synergistically [1]. On average cultures show four pathogens, as in the described case [1]. Sources of the infection include diseases of the genitourinary system, iatrogenic injuries, perianal abscesses, soft tissue abscesses, skin abrasions [10]. Another factor contributing to the development of Fournier's Gangrene is low immunity, often caused by diabetes, liver failure, AIDS, cancer, and chronic alcohol abuse [10]. Prompt initiation of antibiotic therapy and surgical debridement are essential in improving outcomes and mortality [13].

The treatment of Fournier's Gangrene may include Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy (HBOT) and Negative Pressure Wound Therapy (NPWT) [1,3]. The underlying mechanism of HBOT therapy is increasing the oxygen saturation in the tissues, which causes the destruction of anaerobic bacteria and an increase of angiogenesis by increasing fibroblast activity, stimulating wound healing [9]. HBOT therapy may be contraindicated in patients with diseases such as: sinusitis, otitis media, bronchial asthma, lung emphysema and diabetes [1]. HBOT is a highly specialized and expensive procedure, done only in specific centers. The patient needs to be properly qualified for HBOT before transport to the specialized quaternary care center, as was done in the described case (Table 3).Table 3 Inflammatory parameters during the patient's disease course.

Table 3Event	CRP level	Leukocytes [thousand/ul]	Body temperature (°C)	
Admission	124	10.000	38.0	
Necrosectomy 1	200	18,000	37.8	
Necrosectomy 2	180	15,000	37.5	
HBOT day 1	150	12,000	37.4	
NPWT 1	135	10,000	37.5	
NPWT 2	120	8000	37.5	
NPWT 3	180	18,000	38.8	
NPWT 4	250	20,000	38.9	

NPWT can also be used in the treatment of Fournier's Gangrene, in combination with HBOT or independently. NPWT can be applied both in the first phase of the treatment after removal of the necrotic tissue to support wound clearance, and in the second phase of the treatment as preparation for skin transplant- as in the described case [2]. Using NPWT increases the cost of treatment as it requires proper equipment and disposable specialized dressings, and extends time of hospitalization, but it can decrease the mortality rate compared to the use of standard sterile dressings alone [7]. NPWT supports wound healing by continuous removal of exudate containing inflammatory mediators and microorganisms, reduction of edema, increasing local blood flow, stimulation of granulation and contraction of wound edges [4]. NPWT can be considered a very good alternative for treating wounds caused by Fournier's Gangrene. Unfortunately the mortality rate related to the disease is still very high. Depending on the source, the average mortality rate of hospitalized patients is 20–70 % [1,3,8].

The patient's care involved many different medical specialists. While the patient was primarily managed by the Intensive Care Unit and the Department of General Surgery, his treatment also required the consultation of a clinical microbiologist, HBOT specialist, nephrologist, and plastic surgeon. Decisions regarding the patient's treatment were made jointly, after consultations and after remote contact with quaternary care centers. The patient's attending physicians coordinated the interdisciplinary actions. This case illustrates the importance of effective communication between different clinical specialists in the treatment of such a complicated and multiorgan disease as Fournier's Gangrene.

4 Conclusions

Fournier's Gangrene is a disease that carries a strong risk of patient's death until the completion of the final stage of the treatment- the application of skin transplant. In this case, despite the initial improvement of the patient's condition, removal of necrotic tissue, and the achievement of sufficient level of granulation tissue for skin transplant, the patient developed urosepsis followed by a sudden cardiac arrest resulting in the patient's death. While taking care of the patient, we must remember that while the main manifestation of Fournier's Gangrene are changes of the skin and subcutaneous tissue, it is a multiorgan disease that affects the whole body.

The purpose of our case report was to describe the various methods that can be employed to treat Fournier's gangrene including intravenous antibiotic therapy, necrosectomy, chronic wound care with septic dressings and tissue debridement, HBOT, and NPWT, and to highlight the importance of interdisciplinary cooperation between multiple medical specialists. In addition, we described the management of this complicated disease in a local community with remote coordination with and transfer to the Hyperbaric Medicine Center where HBOT was performed.

Consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.

Credit authorship contribution statement

Michał Bes: data collection and analysis, original manuscript.

Isabella Chojnacka: translation, editing.

Weronika Szczecińska: editing.

Jacek Zieliński: review.

Guarantor

Jacek Zieliński.

Declaration of competing interest

None.
