pmc Core Tip: Herpes simplex virus can be latent in the sensory ganglia of the host and reactivate periodically, resulting in recurrent herpes infection. The patient presented in this case report achieved good recovery after multidisciplinary consultation, treatment of the viral infection with oral and topical administration of antiviral drugs, the anti-inflammatory effect of furacilin, hemostasis with local epinephrine injection and application of thrombin lyophilized powder, and the use of a wet wound healing approach.

INTRODUCTION

Alphaherpesvirus belongs to the Herpesviridae family, and has a relatively large, monopartite, double-stranded linear deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). It mainly infects the skin, mucosa, and nerves, and can affect various hosts including humans and other animals. Here, we present the case of a patient seen by the gastroenterology department at our hospital who experienced an oral and perioral herpes infection following noninvasive ventilation during admission to the intensive care unit (ICU)[1]. The patient was treated with topical and oral antiviral and antibacterial drugs, uracil, hemostatic measures, and nutritional and supportive care[2,3]. A wet wound healing approach was also implemented with good results.

CASE PRESENTATION

Chief complaints

Following noninvasive ventilation in the ICU, a 73-year-old female patient developed an oral and perioral herpes infection.

History of present illness

A large wound developed around the patient’s lips and in her mouth 2 d after noninvasive ventilation during admission to the ICU for management of decompensated cirrhosis complicated by abdominal infection, spontaneous peritonitis, hypoproteinemia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and septic shock.

History of past illness

The patient initially presented to the hospital with a 3-d history of abdominal pain accompanied by 2 d of dizziness. She was admitted to the ICU, where she was found to have decompensated cirrhosis complicated by abdominal infection, spontaneous peritonitis, hypoproteinemia, ARDS, and septic shock. She was treated with noninvasive ventilation for management of ARDS.

Personal and family history

The patient did not have any pertinent personal or family medical history.

Physical examination

The patient was transferred to the gastroenterology department for further management. At this point, her consciousness was intact and she had no ongoing abdominal pain or distension, no chest tightness, and no asthma. The perioral wound progressed to exhibit local bleeding with crusting of blood, and measured approximately 10 cm × 10 cm.

Laboratory examinations

The following laboratory values were observed in the patient at the time of transfer to gastroenterology: Prothrombin time 15.9 sec; partial thromboplastin time 34.5 sec; albumin 27.9 g/L; alanine aminotransferase 56 U/L; total bilirubin 129.4 μmol/L; neutrophils 79.2%; hemoglobin 87 g/L; platelet count 48 × 109/L; and high sensitivity C-reactive protein 77 mg/L.

MULTIDISCIPLINARY EXPERT CONSULTATION

Dermatology was consulted regarding treatment of the patient’s perioral wounds; they suggested treatment with oral antiviral drugs, intramuscular injection of nutritious nerve drugs, and application of topical penciclovir and mupirocin around the lips. Stomatology was also consulted, and they suggested wet application of topical nitrocilin around the lips.

FINAL DIAGNOSIS

Perioral herpes infection secondary to noninvasive ventilation.

TREATMENT

The patient achieved good recovery after multidisciplinary consultation and treatment including oral and topical antiviral and antibiotic administration, nutritional and symptomatic supportive care, the anti-inflammatory effect of furacilin, hemostasis with local epinephrine injection and application of topical thrombin lyophilized powder, and the use of a wet wound healing approach.

OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP

Following treatment, the patient’s wound fully healed and she was discharged from the hospital. The perioral wound before and after treatment is depicted in Figure 1.

Figure 1 Perioral wound due to herpes infection, before and after treatment. A-B: Herpes infection causing large wound around the lips before (A) and after (B) medical treatment and wet wound care.

DISCUSSION

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) can be latent in the sensory ganglia of the host and reactivate periodically, resulting in recurrent infection. Herpes infection is characterized histologically by epidermal blistering and necrosis and the presence of multinucleated epithelial giant cells, eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions, and significant neutrophilic and lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate[4]. An immune response can be stimulated immediately by HSV infection, and, if so, lesions are typically limited to the skin surface and mucous membranes. However, when HSV infection occurs in newborns with immature immune function or people with immune deficiency (i.e. in the settings of organ transplantation, immunosuppressant use, or anti-tumor treatment), herpes can spread throughout body to infect the brain, liver, lung, eye, adrenal gland, skin and mucous membranes, and other various sites. Herpes infection in an immunocompromised setting is serious and carries a high mortality rate[5-7]. When the skin has extensive damage, such with eczema or burns, HSV often manifests as generalized infection of skin the and mucous membranes and can cause disseminated lesions. The patient in the present report had a large perioral wound measuring 10 cm × 10 cm accompanied by bleeding, difficulty opening the mouth, pain, and changes in self-image. After consultation, the cause of the patient’s wound was identified as herpes infection. The wound was effectively managed with antiviral treatment, the anti-inflammatory effect of furacilin, and local hemostatic therapy. Additionally, a wet wound healing approach was implemented, and, through keeping the wound moist, healing was achieved.

One of the antiviral medications used in the management of the patient’s perioral herpes infection was topical penciclovir. Penciclovir is a nucleoside antiviral drug that inhibits HSV types I and II and can be administered topically with a cream. The antibacterial medication mupirocin is suitable for skin infection caused by Gram-positive cocci, and is used to treat primary skin infections, pustulosis, furuncle, folliculitis, and infections secondary to eczema[8,9]. Furacilin can interfere with bacterial glucose metabolism and the oxidase function to cause bacteriostasis or sterilization[10]. This drug has a broad spectrum of antibacterial activity, and is effective against various Gram-positive and anaerobic pathogenic bacteria; however, it not as effective in the treatment of infections caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus spp., or Pneumococcus spp.[11,12]. It is also ineffective against fungi and molds, but it is still effective against bacterial infections secondary to mold[13].

Epinephrine injection can cause constriction of small arteries with a less potent effect on veins, and is especially effective on the small vessels of the skin and mucosae. Lyophilized thrombin powder is also used for hemostasis of small blood vessels, gastrointestinal bleeding, and traumatic bleeding that is not amenable to surgical ligation. Epinephrine and lyophilized thrombin powder can function well in achieving local hemostasis, and according to the wet healing theory, this combination is more likely to reduce the potential cost associated with the use of advanced wound dressings. This is accomplished via the promotion of wound healing by keeping the wound wet and has been associated with faster healing rates[14]. In the present case, we used a nitrofurazone dressing with regular dressing change. Also, a gentle dressing change technique was used to prevent injury to the healing skin.

Finally, with respect to the psychology of the patient and her family, we used a gradual communication strategy. This strategy facilitated cooperation between the patient and her family and medical staff, which we believe improved the treatment outcome and promoted her ongoing rehabilitation.

CONCLUSION

This case report shares valuable experience in the clinical management of perioral herpes infection following noninvasive ventilation. There are few reports in the literature describing an effective treatment plan with respect to such a case. In the present case, the patient's wound healed after administration of oral and topical antiviral medications, furacilin, local epinephrine and topical thrombin powder, and a wet wound healing approach with no observed adverse reactions or toxic side effects. In patients managed with noninvasive ventilation, nursing and supportive staff should be aware of the signs of perioral herpes infection, including unusual pain with or without associated wounds of the skin around the mouth. The treatment regimen described in this case report was effective in accelerating the wound healing process and eradicating local herpes infection. Therefore, in patients who develop HSV infection following noninvasive ventilation, the authors suggest that the pharmacological and wound care measures applied here should be pursued.

Informed consent statement: The patient provided informed written consent for the publication of this case report.

Conflict-of-interest statement: All authors report having no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.

CARE Checklist (2016) statement: The authors have read the CARE Checklist (2016), and the manuscript was prepared and revised according to the CARE Checklist (2016).

Provenance and peer review: Unsolicited article; Externally peer reviewed.

Peer-review model: Single blind

Peer-review started: December 11, 2022

First decision: January 9, 2023

Article in press: February 22, 2023

Specialty type: Health care sciences and services

Country/Territory of origin: China

Peer-review report’s scientific quality classification

Grade A (Excellent): 0

Grade B (Very good): 0

Grade C (Good): C

Grade D (Fair): D

Grade E (Poor): 0

P-Reviewer: Amlak BT, Ethiopia; Chiu H, Taiwan S-Editor: Liu JH L-Editor: Filipodia P-Editor: Liu JH
