pmcINTRODUCTION

Thiamine (vitamin B1) is a water-soluble essential micronutrient which is required for energy production. Its deficiency is caused by nutritional imbalance, chronic alcoholism, excessive losses, or drug interactions with thiamine metabolism (i.e., oxythiamine, thiaminase, or methotrexate and metronidazole).[1] Its deficiency is associated with dry and wet beriberi. Acute form of wet beriberi known as Shoshin beriberi is an acute presentation of cardiogenic shock which is rapidly reversed with thiamine administration.[2] Here we present successful management of intraoperative acute decompensated heart failure probably due to thiamine deficiency which was reversed with the administration of thiamine in the intensive care unit.

CASE REPORT

A 13-year-old male patient with a/h/o of electric burn over the right arm, right axilla, and right-sided thoracic and abdominal region from the anterior axillary line to posterior axillary line was posted for post-burn contracture release due to restriction of routine activity. The patient gave a history of electric burns over the right arm, right axillary region, and right and left foot in 2013. He gives a history of debridement of burnt area with amputation of the right great toe and 4th and 5th toes of the left foot with skin grafting in 2013 under general anesthesia. He was again operated in June 2014 and 2015 for complaints of difficulty in extension of arm; contracture release of right axillary region with skin grafting was done under general anesthesia. In this period patient had restriction of movements and was hospitalized for 1 month after the first surgery in 2013 and was admitted for 15 days during subsequent surgeries. He received multiple blood transfusions during the first and subsequent surgeries. Patient follows a vegetarian diet. The patient gives a history of weight loss of 2 kg over the last three months. He had reduced appetite, felt tired all the time, felt weaker, had wounds taking a long time to heal, had poor concentration, and was feeling cold most of the time. As there was restriction of exertional activity because of contracture, we were unable to assess the patient’s metabolic equivalent score or effort tolerance. Based on the height and weight, the BMI was 12.9, placing the BMI for age at less than the 1st percentile for boys aged 13 years. This child was underweight. Patient was able to go to school and was able to walk at normal speed. Patient’s weight was 32 kg. Chest X-ray and electrocardiogram were normal.

After taking written informed consent from the guardian (parents), the patient was taken to the operation theatre. Monitors were attached and preoperative vitals were noted. Heart rate was 94/min with BP of 104/62 mm of Hg and SpO2 was 98% on room air. Patient was premedicated with Inj. Glycopyrrolate (0.004 mg/kg), Inj. Ondansetron (0.15 mg/kg), Inj. Midazolam (0.05 mg/kg), and Inj. Fentanyl (1 mcg/kg). The patient was preoxygenated with 100% oxygen for 3 min. Anesthesia was induced with Inj. Propofol 2.5 mg/kg and patient was relaxed with Inj. Atracurium 0.75 mg/kg. The patient was intubated orally with cuffed ET tube no. 6. Anesthesia was maintained with Sevoflurane with O2:N2O (50:50) maintaining MAC of 1 and Atracurium as skeletal muscle relaxant. Intraoperative monitoring included continuous ECG, pulse oximetry, NIBP, End Tidal Carbon Dioxide, and urine output. Intraoperatively, the patient suddenly developed tachycardia with hypotension (HR-150/min and BP of 70/30 mm of Hg). SpO2 dropped to 84%. Pink frothy secretions were seen in ET tube. On auscultation bilateral crepitations were present. The procedure was stopped. FiO2 was increased to 100%. Inj. Furosemide 1 mg/kg was given. Positive pressure ventilation was given. Patient was taken into the deeper plane of anesthesia. Inj. Atracurium was given. Inj. Noradrenaline was started via infusion pump to maintain a MAP of 60 mm of Hg. Arterial blood gas analysis was done which showed hypoxia with decreased PaO2/FiO2 ratio to 150 mm of Hg (PH-7.39, bicarbonate level-23) with lactate level of 4.5 mmol/l. Gradually patient’s saturation became 100% and BP was 90/50 mm of Hg on vasopressor support. Heart rate was decreased to 130 beats/min. Surgery (post-burn contracture release) was completed in 45 min. After completion of the procedure, the patient’s respiratory attempts were assessed. After spontaneous respiratory attempts, the patient was reversed with Inj. Neostigmine (0.06 mg/kg) and Inj. Glycopyrrolate (0.008 mg/kg). After assessing tone, power, and reflex, the patient was extubated with good air blast. The patient was kept on O2 support of 6 L/min and was shifted to the intensive care unit. In the intensive care unit, the patient’s cardiac status was evaluated by bedside transthoracic 2D echo. It showed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20%, global LV hypokinesia with dilated LV and mild MR/TR. After a thorough history and excluding all other causes, it was suspected that patient had acute decompensated heart failure due to thiamine deficiency. Immediately Inj. Thiamine 100 mg infusion for five days was started along with Tab. Carvedilol 3.125 mg BD, Tab. Spironolactone + Furosemide (20/50) BD, Tab. Enalapril 2.5 mg OD. Chest X-ray was done which showed pulmonary edema. IV fluid was restricted to 2 ml/kg/hr maintaining negative fluid balance and urine output was measured hourly. Total input/output in 48 hr was 2880/2750 ml. Gradually patient’s vasopressor requirement was decreased and stopped after 24 hr and oxygen requirement was decreased. Repeat ABGA showed an improved PaO2/FiO2 ratio (366). On auscultation, air entry was equal and clear. Repeat 2D echo after four days showed LVEF of 50%, fair LV function, normal-sized cardiac chambers, and no MR/TR. Patient was assessed daily and was discharged after seven days with the advice of follow up after six weeks and eating thiamine rich diet, for example, green peas, oranges, yoghurt.

DISCUSSION

Thiamine is a water-soluble essential micronutrient required for cellular energy production. Thiamine pyrophosphate (TP) is needed in Kreb’s cycle, which is important for generation of ATP and aerobic metabolism. Thiamine is important for the conduction of nerve impulses, maintenance of nerve membrane stability, and modulation of membrane ion channels for effective nerve conduction.[3]

Deficiency of thiamine is caused by nutritional deficiency, alcohol excess, and diuretic use. Risk factors in pediatric age group are poor socioeconomic status and inadequate diet. It presents as dry and wet beriberi. Wet beriberi presents as a failure of cardiovascular system (CVS). Wet beriberi has an acute form presenting severe fulminant failure of CVS with breathlessness, tachycardia, cardiomegaly, high-output heart failure in addition to neuropathy, known as Shoshin beriberi. TP deficiency causes increased anaerobic metabolism and deficiency of ATP, which leads to a decrease in the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase and an increase in adenosine levels. This causes a decrease in peripheral resistance and an increase in venous return to the heart (preload). These combined effects of myocardial depression and increased preload cause high-output cardiac failure.[45] Eventually, the patient develops hypotension and complete cardiovascular collapse.

The intraoperative presentation of sudden hypotension, tachycardia, and secretions coming through the tube indicates heart failure with pulmonary edema. Differential diagnosis was hypovolemia, fluid overload, massive blood transfusion, pulmonary embolism, anemia-induced heart failure, lighter planes of anaesthesia, hypoxia-induced heart failure, multivitamin deficiency, blood transfusion reaction, etc.

Patient was adequately hydrated preoperatively so hypovolemia was excluded. Anesthesia agents used were cardio-stable (Sevoflurane, Atracurium). Blood transfusion was not given and only one pint of crystalloid was given, so fluid overload and blood transfusion-related complications were excluded. The patient was a young male, with no comorbidities and was physically active so pulmonary embolism due to DVT was excluded. Patient was not anemic, so other causes were excluded. The patient had a history of minor (2 kg) weight loss, which guided us to assess nutritional status and consider vitamin B1 deficiency (Shoshin beriberi) as a cause. It should be suspected in different clinical scenarios such as severe sepsis, burns, unexplained heart failure, or lactic acidosis, neurological disorder in patients with previous history of alcoholism, starvation, chronic malnutrition, long-term parenteral feeding, hyperemesis gravidarum, or bariatric surgery.[6]

The diagnosis of Shoshin beriberi is often difficult in the perioperative period and critical care setting due to its common clinical manifestations, low index of suspicion, and the lack of readily available and reliable emergent blood thiamine measurements.[7]

So, we can conclude that thiamine deficiency should be suspected in unexplained cardiac failure in the perioperative period and its administration should be considered as an approach for treatment.

Financial support and sponsorship

Nil.

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts of interest.
