pmcIntroduction

Blunt bowel injury (BBI) is a relatively rare but insidiously abdominal emergency, which presents a diagnostic challenge for trauma surgeons.1 Estimates for the incidence of BBI range from 5% to 15% of blunt abdominal traumas, and the perforation occurs in less than 1% of blunt abdominal traumas.2 Although multiple diagnostic modalities including bowel injury prediction score have been developed to predict early intervention for BBIs, findings may be nonspecific.3 Delay in diagnosis and surgical management of unrecognized BBIs is associated with significant morbidity and mortality, including abdominal sepsis, liver dysfunction, and multiple organ dysfunction syndromes (MODS).4, 5, 6 During the last few decades, damage control surgery (DCS) has been implemented to relook anastomosis during planned relaparotomy7 and manage severe abdominal traumas by delayed primary anastomosis, which has led to promising outcomes.8,9

Severe trauma patients are identified in a hypermetabolic and hypercatabolic state contributing to systemic immunosuppression and malnutrition and ultimately leading to progressive organ failure.10, 11, 12, 13 Nutrition support in the trauma population is crucial to attenuate hypermetabolic stress response, enhance immune function, and improve outcomes.14,15 Enteral nutrition (EN) is the preferred feeding method. However, EN is not always feasible in BBI patients with an open abdomen after DCS, especially in those intestinal discontinuity patients with a high-output ostomy. Recently, chyme reinfusion (CR), a technique to extracorporeal recycle proximal chyme to the distal end of the stoma, has been proved to be able to restore the intestinal function and alleviate liver injury in patients with temporary double enterostomy (TDE).16,17

Here, we present a case of BBI with postoperative hyperbilirubinemia requiring DCS and open abdomen management who has just undergone TDE. We observed that multiple portions EN and CR under acute gastrointestinal injury conditions alleviated hyperbilirubinemia and led to discharge without complications.

Case report

A 47-year-old male driver was involved in a motor vehicle collision. Systematic trauma evaluation at a local hospital identified multiple injuries, including subarachnoid hemorrhage, bilateral lung contusions, rib fractures, blunt abdominal injury, lumbar fractures, and an open-book pelvic fracture. Abdominal CT scan showed no ascites or free gas. The injury severity score was 48. On the post-trauma day (PTD) 3, focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) confirmed the presence of ascites. Subsequent diagnostic paracentesis demonstrated ascites with a dark green color. An emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed, and intraoperative findings showed mass intestinal fluid in the abdominal cavity, severe edema of the intestinal wall, and complete rupture of the jejunum, 50 cm distal to the Treitz ligament (Fig. 1A and B). The primary anastomosis was performed at the initial laparotomy after debridement of the injured area and removal of the ruptured jejunum (10 cm) on both sides. Postoperatively, the patient developed Gram-negative sepsis, hypotension requiring multiple vasopressors, and MODS, including acute kidney injury (AKI), acute gastrointestinal injury, and hyperbilirubinemia secondary to hepatic dysfunction.Fig. 1 Intraoperative exploration and schematic diagram of operative management. (A) and (B) Emergency laparotomy and intraoperative findings at an outside hospital. (C), (D), and (E) Secondary damage control laparotomy and temporary abdominal closure.

Fig. 1

Given the severity of his injuries, the patient was subsequently transferred to our trauma referral center for further management on PTD 8. Upon arrival, he was comatose (Glasgow coma scale score 2T1), in shock (heart rate 125 beats/min, mean arterial pressure < 70 mmHg, norepinephrine 1.2 mg·kg−1·min−1), acidotic (pH 7.25, base excess −6.55 mEq/L, lactic acid 3.92 mmol/L), and peritonitic. His skin and sclera turned yellow. The patient was admitted to the trauma intensive care unit (TICU) for salvage resuscitation involving hemodynamic monitoring, abdominal examinations, serial laboratories, imaging, and organ support. Digestive juice-like fluid was drained through drainage tubes around the jejunal anastomosis. Laboratory test results are shown in Table 1. FAST found a mild amount of ascites. CT revealed extensive exudation in the abdominal cavity, dilated proximal jejunum, and multiple orthopedic injuries.Table 1 Laboratory data.

Table 1Variable	Reference rangea	On arrival at the trauma intensive care unit	
Hemoglobin (g/L)	130 – 175	78	
Red-cell count ( × 1012/L)	4.3 – 5.8	2.7	
White-cell count ( × 109/L)	3.5 – 9.5	17.3	
Platelet count ( × 109/L)	125 – 350	190	
Prothrombin time (s)	9 – 14	20	
Activated partial thromboplastin time (s)	20 – 40	50	
International normalized ratio	0.80 – 1.20	3.12	
C-reaction protein (mg/L)	< 10	289.3	
Procalcitonin (ng/mL)	0 – 0.046	10.7	
Interleukin- 6 (ng/L)	< 7.0	826	
Albumin (g/L)	35 – 50	26	
Total bilirubin (μmol/L)	3 – 22	391.5	
Direct bilirubin (μmol/L)	0 – 5.0	284.1	
Indirect bilirubin (μmol/L)	0 – 19.0	58.7	
Alanine aminotransferase (U/L)	13 – 69	35	
Aspartate aminotransferase (U/L)	15 – 46	58	
a Reference values are affected by many variables, including the patient population and the laboratory methods used. They may therefore not be appropriate for all patients.

DCS

Given the combination of hemodynamic instability with MODS, the patient's physiologic reserve could not even tolerate abbreviate damage control laparotomy (DCL); he was not taken to the operating room immediately. Soon after arrival, continuous renal replacement therapy combined with bilirubin adsorption was initiated for AKI, hyperbilirubinemia, and hyperkalemia. In addition, we applied the negative pressure irrigation tubes instead of passive drainage to gravity for adequate drainage, and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was also arranged. Soon after initial stabilization, 48 h after the referral, the patient was transferred to the operating room for surgical management. Intestinal fluid in the abdominal cavity, small intestinal edema, and an entire rupture of primary anastomosis were found during the operation. DCL with temporary abdominal closure was performed within 55 min (Fig. 1C–E). Besides, we created a TDE where the anastomosis was ruptured.

Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the TICU for further management. Upon hemodynamic stability on postoperative day (POD) 2, bioelectrical impedance analysis-directed fluid restriction and continuous renal replacement therapy with an ultrafiltration rate were initiated to achieve a net negative fluid balance18 (Fig. 2A). Bedside dressing change for the open abdomen was performed every 2 days (Fig. 2B–E).18,19 After failing to achieve primary fascial closure, the patient underwent split-thickness skin grafting to cover the open abdomen on POD 78 (Fig. 2F).Fig. 2 Time course of fluid resuscitation variables and open abdomen management. (A) Time course of daily fluid input, daily fluid output, and daily fluid balance variables. (B–F) Time course of postoperative open abdomen size under the change of fluid balance.

Fig. 2

Nutrition support therapy and chyme reinfusion

Through initial nutritional assessment on admission to TICU, the patient was classified as at a high risk of malnutrition with a score of 6 based on Nutrition Risk Screening 2002. Energy requirements were determined by the indirect calorimetry using a metabolic cart (MedGraphics, USA) plus an injury-and-activity factor of 40%. Measured resting energy expenditure was 1850 kcal/day, and respiratory quotient was 1.00. Besides, weight-based equations (approximately 1.2 – 2.0 g/kg/day) of protein provision were required for this multiple trauma patient.

After multidisciplinary team cross-communication, EN was decided as the preferred use, considering the benefits of reducing septic complications and promoting primary fascial closure, as well as possible cholestatic liver dysfunction from parenteral nutrition. EN was initiated until POD 5 secondary to bioelectrical impedance analysis-directed fluid resuscitation and extreme gastrointestinal tract edema relief. First, proximal portion EN support (glucose sodium chloride) was started at 10 mL/h on POD 5 through a nasogastric tube placed preoperatively (Fig. 3A①). After the stoma fluid outflow from the proximal portion of TDE, EN was changed to short peptide formula (30 mL/h) from POD 6 (Fig. 3B). Besides, the patient developed cholestatic cholecystitis due to long-term fasting and undergoing percutaneous gallbladder puncture and drainage on POD 5. Once the airway access for mechanical ventilation changed from orotracheal intubation to tracheostomy tube, the patient was transitioned to an oral diet.Fig. 3 Time course of bilirubin, EN, and CR. (A) Schematic diagram of EN and CR, ① Proximal portion EN through a nasogastric tube, ② Chyme reinfusion to the distal portion of TDE via a jejunal feeding tube, ③ Distal portion EN via jejunal feeding tube. (B) Changes in bilirubin, EN, and CR within 30 days after secondary damage control laparotomy. Tbil, DBiL and IbiLwas assessed at 48 h and 24h before surgery by our team, which is present before POD 0 in the figure.

EN: Enteral nutrition, CR: Chyme reinfusion, TBil: total bilirubin, DBil: direct bilirubin, IBil: indirect bilirubin.

Fig. 3

Second, a 14 Fr jejunal feeding tube (Uro Technology Sdn Bhd, Malaysia) was inserted in the distal portion of TDE for chyme reinfusion. Given the separation of intestinal adhesions during the second operation, the abdominal drainage became clear, and methylene blue was injected into the distal portion of TDE to exclude intestinal fistula. On POD 8, chyme delivered from the proximal portion of TDE was drained and filtered through a tube placed in the ostomy bag. All chyme was collected without discard. Then, chyme was injected into the distal portion of TDE by an enteral feeding pump through the jejunal feeding tube (Fig. 3A②). The total amount of CR can be calculated in real time. The entire device was hermetic with continuous infusion so that chyme was not exposed to air. In addition, the connected tubing was lengthy and did not affect the patient's exercise. Trained nursing staff performed the entire CR process. Moreover, chyme and bile drained from the gallbladder were sealed and continuously reinfused through the jejunal feeding tube. After performing postoperative bilirubin adsorption twice, a rapid rise in bilirubin levels recurred. However, with the increase in CR, there was a decrease in total bilirubin and direct bilirubin, and the yellowing of skin and sclera was relieved (Fig. 3B). CR was carried out until the final staged reconstruction.

Third, distal portion EN via jejunal feeding tube was started on POD 9 with short peptide formula (Fig. 3A③). The distal portion EN was injected into the distal portion of TDE together with CR through the 3-way joint on the connecting tube. Supplemental enteral glutamine was provided via jejunal feeding tube to maintain gut integrity. The dosage of EN was gradually increased from 600 kcal/600 mL to a maximum of 2400 kcal/2400 mL and was well tolerated (Fig. 3B). The amount of protein increased to 144 g (2.0 g/kg) on POD 12, due to elevated demand for multiple trauma and protein loss from the abdominal fluid output with an open abdomen. On POD 20, we started standard EN formula to stimulate the normal digestive function. Through EN therapy, the patient gained weight, and laboratory values returned to normal levels. On POD 95, the patient was discharged to the orthopedic department for continued treatment. His relatives learned to practice EN and CR skillfully before discharge.

Home EN and staged reconstruction

The patient was provided home EN and CR for 6 months until staged reconstruction. At the final operation, the surgeon removed the jejunal feeding tube, performed an anastomosis of the distal and proximal ends of TDE, and reconstructed the abdominal wall (Fig. 4). Eventually, the patient was discharged with a regular diet.Fig. 4 Abdominal wall reconstruction and TDE reversal. TDE: temporary double enterostomy. (A), (B), and (C) Gastrointestinal tract radiography, CT findings, and views of the abdominal wall before reconstruction. (D), (E), and (F) TDE reversal and abdominal wall reconstruction.

Fig. 4

Discussion

Following blunt abdominal trauma, especially in multiple trauma patients, BBI posed a significant challenge to handle due to diagnostic uncertainty and severe complications resulting from untimely intervention.20 In a BBI patient under primary anastomosis, hyperbilirubinemia may develop secondary to postoperative abdominal sepsis.4,21 In this condition, timely source control and appropriate perioperative management are crucial. This case study highlights that prompt source control, including DCS, open abdomen, and multiple portions EN combined with CR, may be feasible and safe options in a BBI patient with postoperative hyperbilirubinemia.

Despite improved diagnostic methods and non-operative management, initial CT scans missed 13% of cases with subsequent diagnoses of BBIs.1,6 Delayed diagnosis of more than 24 h in these BBI patients led to increased mortality.22 Besides, delayed presentation of small bowel perforation following BBI may complicate the diagnosis and management.23 Given the pitfalls of CT in diagnosing BBIs, serial examinations including FAST and clinical adjuncts, can be considered as additional diagnostic or therapeutic interventions by 8 h after arrival, especially in unconscious patients. In addition, despite efficient healing capacity, primary anastomosis of the small bowel was at the discretion of trauma- and intraoperative-related factors. Anastomotic leak and complications of primary anastomosis were related to hemodynamic status, excessive crystalloid infusion, and severity of peritoneal contamination, especially for anastomosis performed more than 48 h after initial trauma.24,25 Thus, diverting stoma or delayed primary anastomosis during planned re-laparotomy might be preferred when the operation was postponed with severe peritoneal contamination.

DCS has been implemented in abdominal catastrophes for abdominal contamination control and planned re-laparotomy.9 The application of DCS concept in this patient was divided into 4 phases: ICU management, DCL, temporary abdominal closure, and definitive closure/delayed planned ventral hernia repair. Coagulopathy can be corrected with balanced blood transfusions in critically ill trauma patients before DCL. To save time, abdominal contamination can be controlled with sutures and rapid bowel ligation combined with intra-intestinal drainage.26,27 In this case, we created a temporary diversion and left the abdominal cavity open to facilitate source control and provide a window for intra-abdominal drainage. During postoperative management, bioelectrical impedance analysis-guided fluid resuscitation was implemented to decrease fluid overload, which helped to reduce visceral edema and promote primary fascial closure. Despite the failure to primary fascial closure, the patient ultimately underwent stoma reversal and abdominal wall reconstruction 6 months after discharge to restore normal anatomy.

If any portion of the gut works, use it. Following the operation, acute gastrointestinal injury caused by intra-abdominal infection and severe intestinal edema secondary to fluid resuscitation troubled the surgeon. Therefore, we undertook bioelectrical impedance analysis-guided resuscitation to reduce intestinal edema, which improved gastrointestinal function.18 Once the function of the first portion recovered, EN was provided to use this portion of the gut. Although the abdominal cavity was still open, we started EN via a jejunal feeding tube once the second portion of intestinal function recovered.28,29 The second portion of the gut was longer and was the main part for absorption. Multiple portions EN promoted early achievement of caloric goals, which avoided insufficient EN and supplemental parenteral nutrition. In addition, home EN was indispensable to improve the baseline nutrition status for stoma reversal and abdominal wall reconstruction in this patient.

CR helped to alleviate hyperbilirubinemia and avoid fluid loss caused by jejunostomy. Under normal circumstances, a large amount of digestive fluid passes through the proximal jejunum every day, and CR avoided complications caused by the loss of fluid and electrolytes.16,30 CR in TDE patients restored the bile salt-FGF19 axis and improved gut-liver function by promoting functional recovery of enterohepatic circulation of bile acids.17 Moreover, CR prolonged the contact time between nutrients and the distal portion of intestine, which promoted absorption. With the increased volume of CR, the level of bilirubin gradually decreased, and the hyperbilirubinemia was fundamentally treated. In the present case, CR was hermetic with continuous infusion throughout the process, ensuring the freshness and timeliness of digestive fluid infusion. In addition, CR was infused with EN to reduce extra workload.

In summary, we report a rare case of BBI with postoperative hyperbilirubinemia requiring DCS with a TDE. Multiple portions EN and CR under open abdomen conditions were possible and alleviated hyperbilirubinemia.

Funding

This work was supported by Grants from the 10.13039/501100001809 National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 82270587) and the Jinling Hospital Scientific Research Project (Grant No. YYZD2021011).

Ethical statement

This study was reported in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) in Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University (No. 2021DZGZR-YBB-009). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Author contributions

Kai Wang, Wei-Wei Ding and Yun-Xuan Deng participated in patient care and case summary. Kai Wang, Chao Yang, and Kai-Wei Li collected data. Kai Wang and Yun-Xuan Deng drafted and revised the manuscript. Wei-Wei Ding and Xin-Yu Wang helped to revise the manuscript. All authors critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank all medical staff for their excellent work and support and also thank Dr. Wen-Jian Mao for his invaluable support to the schematic diagram drafting.

Peer review under responsibility of Chinese Medical Association.
