pmc1 Introduction

Boerhaave's syndrome (BS) is a rare and spontaneous transmural perforation of the esophagus caused by a sudden increase of intra-esophageal pressure and the clinical manifestation depends on the site of the perforation. The typical sign of BS is excruciating retrosternal chest pain due to intrathoracic esophageal perforation (EP). Since the differential diagnosis of BS is difficult for clinicians due to its rarity and nonspecific symptoms; the majority of cases are diagnosed incidentally or by delay [1], [2]. EP complication in patient with achalasia is a result of pneumatic dilatation with undescribed spontaneous perforation. Achalasia is an uncommon but an important esophageal motility disorder that occurs equally in men and women [3]. Here, we describe a patient with a history of achalasia that diagnosed for BS according to SCARE Checklist 2020 [4].

2 Presentation of case

A 63-year-old man with a previous medical history of achalasia and dyspepsia was referred to the Razi hospital, Rasht, Iran, with a complaint of sudden onset of severe right chest pain, epigastric pain, chest retrosternal pain, and respiratory distress in March 2022. At the time of admission, patients represented a tachycardic of 130 p/m with normal arterial pressure of 120/80 mm Hg and no fever. Physical examination revealed diminished breath sounds on the right side with the pain and tenderness of epigastric. Laboratory findings were normal and only O2 saturation was reported to be 88 % at the time of administration. The computed tomography (CT) scan revealed pneumomediastinum, pleural effusion, and collapsed right lobe of the lung (Fig. 1). In the examination of the pleural fluid, esophageal rupture was suspected according to the Candida albicans in the pleural space, which indicated extravasation to the right pleural space with esophageal content. The general condition of the patient gradually worsened and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and intubated. To control the infection, antibiotics, chest physical therapy, and adequate intravenous fluids were started; also, for nutritional support, nasogastric tube feeding was applied.Fig. 1 Right side hydropneumothorax.

Fig. 1

On the third day after ICU admission, the white blood cell (WBC) count, levels of blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and potassium (K) were elevated and tachyarrhythmia was reported. On the fourth day, multiple organ failures occurred such as kidney. The patients underwent hemodialysis for four time and the function of kidney reached almost normal levels. Thoracotomy was performed due to the continuation of sepsis and accumulation of pus and the secretion of the right pleural space. During aggressive debridement, a 6-cm longitudinal rupture occurred in the upper esophagus. The patient rapidly became more unstable and noradrenaline and vasopressin support were applied. A T-tube was implanted and sutures are used to anchor fistula and two chest tubes were inserted (Fig. 2).Fig. 2 Right thoracotomy.

Fig. 2

The patient was supported by a ventilator, vasopressor, and broad-spectrum IV piperacillin/tazobactam antibiotic therapy. Two stents were placed in the esophagus at the site of the perforation to reduce leakage and on top of the first stent to stop the leak, respectively, and oral liquid feeding was started for the patient after five days. The length of stay in the ICU was 39 days and the patient was discharged from the hospital after 8 days. Tracheostomy was performed for the patient 12 days after discharge. Two-month follow-up represented a good condition of the patients.

3 Discussion

BS is one of the most lethal gastrointestinal tract disorders with mortality rates up to 40 %. Perforations are usually longitudinal and occur on the left side of the esophagus because anatomical support is a weakness in the left posterolateral side of the esophagus [5]. Although, in the present case report, the rupture was longitudinal and on the right side about 8-cm above the diaphragm.

The most reported cases of BS were males with upper age. The most common symptoms of BS were reported as severe vomiting, chest pain, dyspnea, dysphagia, subcutaneous emphysema in the neck, tachycardia, fever, and epigastric pain. These symptoms may result in misdiagnosis of BS with other disorders such as pneumonia, myocardial infarction, spontaneous pneumothorax, aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism, perforated peptic ulcer, etc. [6]. Our patient was first diagnosed with spontaneous pneumothorax. The symptoms of BS vary based on the location of the rupture and the prognosis depends on the time of diagnosis as well as the treatment. BS is usually diagnosed accidentally through the evaluation of chest pain in patients. The most available method to diagnose BS is a CT scan, which is useful for the early detection of esophageal rupture [7].

Delayed diagnosis is associated with poor outcomes and by early diagnosis, the surveillance of the patient will be significantly elevated. While clinical management of BS is not well defined and no gold standard therapeutic approach has been recommended (from conservative and endoscopic methods to surgical approaches) [8], endoscopy is a suggested therapeutic method for patients with EP and co-existence of underlying diseases who are not a candidate for surgery [9]. Since the most common causes of mortality among patients with BS are sepsis and multiple organ failure, the primary principle in the clinical management of BS is controlling of sepsis. Our patient developed multiple organ failure, but sepsis was successfully controlled with thoracotomy, debridement, drainage of the mediastinum and pleural space, followed by double esophageal stenting. The applied approach may prevent unnecessary radical surgery of esophageal and following side effects.

4 Conclusion

Due to the difficulty of diagnosis of BS by clinicians, it's important to consider the clinical suspicious in the case of representing similar symptoms and early diagnosis results in more effective treatment and reduces the frequency of morbidity and mortality in patients with BS.

Abbreviations

BS Boerhaave's syndrome

EP Esophageal perforation

CT Computed tomography

ICU Intensive care unit

WBC White blood cell

BUN Blood urea nitrogen

Consent for publication

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.

Patient consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.

Ethical approval

The study is exempt from ethical approval in our institution (Guilan University of Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran).

Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Guarantor

Corresponding author (Manouchehr Aghajanzadeh).

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Pirouz Samidoust and Manouchehr Aghajanzadeh: Been involved in drafting the manuscript and revising the manuscript for important intellectual content. Mohammad Taghi Ashoobi, Mohammad Haghighi, and Mohammad Sadegh Esmaeili Delshad: Responsible for the conception of the idea, supervision, and editing of the project. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Competing interest

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Acknowledgments

Not applicable.
