pmcINTRODUCTION

Pesticide poisoning is a worldwide health problem. Aluminum phosphide (ALP) is one of the most common pesticides used in India. Once ALP comes in contact with moisture, it liberates phosphene gas, which releases oxygen-free radicals, and inhibits mitochondrial enzymes, thereby causing physiological derangements at a cellular level.[2] ALP-related mortality ranges from 40% to 80%. The time lapse between ingestion and initiation of appropriate treatment is one of the major causes of mortality in India. Cardiovascular depression and metabolic acidosis at presentation are predictors of bad outcomes. Early initiation of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has been shown to improve survival rates in patients though there are no proper guidelines due to a lack of evidence-based studies.[3]

CASE REPORT

A 43-year-old man presented to emergency room (ER) with a history of consuming 12 g (four tablets) of ALP in the early morning. At presentation, he complained of abdominal pain, bowel incontinence, and breathlessness. His vitals recorded were as follows: heart rate of 113/min, blood pressure of 60 systolic, respiratory rate of 48/min, and his saturation was not recordable due to profound shock. He was resuscitated with fluid bolus at 30 ml/kg and was initiated on dual inotropes due to refractory shock. His point-of-care echocardiogram (POC- ECHO) revealed severe left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 15%. In view of the severe hemodynamic compromise, rapid sequence intubation was performed with ketamine and rocuronium. His preintubation arterial blood gas revealed severe metabolic acidosis with a pH of 6.98, bicarbonate of 8, and lactate levels of 146. Intravenous sodium bicarbonate of 100 milli equivalence was administered and 50 milliequivalents was repeated every 15 min and 3 g of intravenous magnesium sulfate (MgSO4) was administered followed by 6 g per 24-h infusion was started. Meanwhile, his heart rate dropped to 35/min for which intravenous atropine was administered every 4 min to a maximum of 3 doses. He started developing transient variable heart blocks. Considering his hemodynamic status, we planned to proceed with ECMO in ER. With a vascular surgeon and cardiac anesthetist’s assistance, venoarterial ECMO was performed with 19 French right femoral artery cannula, 29 French right femoral venous cannula, and 8 French distal perfusion cannula through the femoral artery by the ER team. After the post-ECMO procedure, his vitals were stabilized and he was shifted to the intensive care unit. He was decannulated on the 3rd day of admission. The timeline of the events and clinical variables is given below [Figure 1 and Table 1]. During in-hospital admission, he developed bilateral cerebral was shed infarcts, acute kidney injury for which renal replacement therapy was initiated, coagulopathy requiring multiple blood transfusions, lower respiratory tract infection with Elizabethkingia meningoseptica for which minocycline was started, and a reactive pleural effusion for which intercostal drainage was placed and removed. He was admitted to our hospital for 41 days, he was managed by a multidisciplinary team which started from the emergency department with ECMO till physiotherapy, and was discharged home with no neurological deficits and an improving kidney function.

Figure 1 Timeline of events

Table 1 Clinical and metabolic variables and the outcome of the patient

Variable	At ER Pre-ECMO	At 3 h Post-ECMO	At 24 h	At 72 h	At 14 days	
Blood pressure	60 systolic	80 systolic	109/78 mmHg	136/84 mmHg	140/94 mmHg	
LVEF (%)	15	15	15	25	40	
pH/lactate	6.98/146	7.01/129	7.21/26	7.38/12	-	
Creatinine	1.2	2.9	3.1	6.9	5.7	
LVEF: Left ventricular ejection fraction, ECMO: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, ER: Emergency room

DISCUSSION

Most poisoning cases presenting to ER are unknown substances, and they are frequently identified with the toxidrome they exhibit; therefore, ER physicians are anticipated to have a broad understanding of toxins and associated syndrome. The lethal dose is estimated to be 150–500 mg. ALP, like any other toxin, has a high fatality rate close to 70%–100% that is proportional to the amount consumed and the duration is taken to reach first medical contact.[4] Another factor contributing to the toxin’s high mortality rate is the practice of inducing emesis, which hastens the absorption and cellular damage due to the generation of phosphene gas when it comes into contact with water and an acidic environment.[5] The absence of an appropriate antidote, however, is cited as among the most serious flaw. Correcting shock with fluids and inotropes, correcting acidosis, and aiding respiratory support are the most common therapeutic approaches available. We used ECMO in this patient to combat cardiorespiratory insufficiency.[6] There are case reports and case series of ALP poisoning successfully treated with ECMO therapy. However, the guidelines for the initiation of ECMO are glaring and are often done on the basis of clinical, metabolic, and echocardiographic parameters. Above all, the timing of ECMO initiation is a crucial factor in a patient’s survival. Although these are theoretical recommendations based on clinical practice, individuals with significant left ventricular failure and refractory shock may benefit from early initiation of ECMO therapy.

In developing nations such as India, the availability of ECMO is often limited. Hence, a multidisciplinary team approach, knowledge about plausible medical therapy makes an emergency physician’s stance pivotal. The limited data available in such cases also highlight the need for further studies.

Declaration of patient consent

The authors certify that they have obtained all appropriate patient consent forms. In the form, the patients have consent for their images and other clinical information to be reported in the journal. They understand that their names and initials will not be published and due efforts will be made to conceal their identity, but anonymity cannot be guaranteed.

Research quality and ethics statement

The authors followed applicable EQUATOR Network (http://www.equator-network.org/) guidelines, notably the CARE guideline, during the conduct of this report.

Financial support and sponsorship

Nil.

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts of interest.
