pmc1 Introduction

Fournier's gangrene (FG) is a rapidly progressive, fulminant soft-tissue infection of the perineum that rapidly invades the surrounding tissues. It is a potentially fatal disease, with reported mortality rates between 3 and 67 % [1]. In 1764, Baurienne originally described an idiopathic, rapidly progressive soft-tissue necrotizing process that led to gangrene of the male genitalia. However, Jean Alfred Fournier, a Parisian venereologist, is more commonly associated with this disease, which bears his name. In one of Fournier's clinical lectures in 1883, he presented a case of perineal gangrene in an otherwise healthy young man. Since Fournier's description, subsequent experience has shown that, in most cases, Fournier gangrene has an identifiable cause and that it frequently manifests more indolently [2]. Histological examination in patients with FG reveals necrosis of superficial and deep fascia, fibrinoid coagulation in the lumen of vessels, polymorphic cell infiltration of tissues, and necrotic detritus. Pathognomonic is the thrombosis of vessels that feed tissues of a given localization. However, with significant pathomorphological changes in deep tissues, the skin remains intact for a long time [3]. Various clinical risk factors that may render a weakness in a patient's immune status are frequently seen including diabetes mellitus, chronic renal failure, obesity, and immunodeficiency, such as a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection [4]. Here we present a case of FG with retroperitoneal extension in a previous healthy young adult.

This case report has been reported in line with the SCARE Criteria [5].

2 Presentation of case

A 25-year-old male patient with no previous medical history presented to the emergency department on August 2022 with a four-day history of perineal pain, swelling, and discharge. Associated with this he had a high-grade fever and one episode of vomiting of ingested matter. For the above complaint, he visited the nearby health center where he was given unspecified po medication, but he didn't get any improvement. The patient has no history of trauma to the perineum. He had no recent surgery. He has no history of diabetes, hypertension, or other chronic illness. He has no history of chronic alcohol abuse. He was seronegative for HIV and he has no history of any drug intake or no known drug allergy.

On examination, the patient's temperature was 38.8 °C, blood pressure 85/46 mmHg, pulse rate 120 beats per minute, and respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute with no shortness of breath. The patient's body mass index (BMI) was 19 kg/m2. Upon physical examination, the patient appeared to be distressed but was fully aware of his spatial and temporal surroundings. An abdominal examination revealed a distended abdomen with guarding, rebound, and severe direct tenderness in the hypogastrium on the left side. The patient had normal bowel sounds. Genital examination revealed bilateral necrotic scrotum and perineum, associated with a foul-smelling pus discharge, palpable crepitus on the perineum and lower anterior abdominal wall, and an enlarged, edematous and tender scrotum (Fig. 1). There was also a ruptured perianal abscess on the right side of the anus 3 cm lateral from the anal verge. The remainder of the physical examinations showed unremarkable findings.Fig. 1 Grossly necrotic scrotum with pus discharge.

Fig. 1

On investigation see Table 1, investigations at admission and discharge. Since the patient was critically and the clinical signs and symptoms were highly suggestive of FG, no preoperative imaging was done.Table 1 Investigation results at admission and at discharge.

Table 1Parameters	On admission	At discharge	
WBC	19,000	10,000	
RBC	2.86	4.09	
HGB	8.6 g/dl	12.7 g/dl	
HCT	23.7	35.6	
PLT	377,000	341,000	
NEUT	87 %	68 %	
ESR	38	2	
NA+	132	135	
K+	3.53	4.37	
CL	97	109	
CREAT	1.57	0.6	
UREA	64	17	
ALP	50	32	
ALB	2.9	4	
BIL. T	1.0	1	
RBS	218	125	

Subsequently, the patient was resuscitated with normal saline, started broad spectrum antibiotics (ceftriaxone 1 g IV BID later changed to high dose, metronidazole 500 mg IV TID, crystalline penicillin 4miu IV QID), then the patient was immediately transferred (within 30 min) to the operation room. The patient was operated on under general anesthesia and lithotomy position by a senior general surgeon and general surgery residents. The duration of operating time on the first debridement was 2 h. Intraoperatively, there was edematous and necrotic scrotal skin with a foul-smelling abscess oozing from the scrotal skin. The necrotic tissue and abscess track through the inguinal canal to the left side of the lower abdomen and the left side of the retroperitoneum up to the left post-renal space and left diaghram and medially to the aorta (Fig. 2). There were multiple thrombosed vessels. Subsequently, the necrotic tissue was debrided thoroughly, the wound was washed with hydrogen peroxide and normal saline. The patient was transfused with 2 units of crossed-matched blood intraoperatively. Finally, a drain was left in the retroperitoneum, re-debridement was planned after 24 h and the patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (ICU). In the surgical ICU, the patient's vital signs were monitored continuously, input and output monitoring was done, and the previously mentioned antibiotics were continued. The progress of the wound was monitored continuously and wound care BID was given and wound dressing was done using the traditional method since we do not have negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT).Fig. 2 Intraoperative finding of the necrotic tissue and foul smelling dish-water appearing fluid tracking through the inguinal canal to the left lower abdomen and left retroperitoneum with necrotic fascia.

Fig. 2

The patient stayed in the surgical ICU for 5 days and was transferred to the surgical ward. In the meantime, multiple debridements were done (5 times) until the infection is fully controlled. Later the wound granulated well (Fig. 3) and primary closure of the abdominal skin was done. Bilateral testicles were buried in the medial thigh and scrotal reconstruction was done later. The patient had a rough initial postoperative day. However, he improved remarkably with no postoperative complications and was discharged home improved. The patient has had follow-up at the surgical referral clinic after discharge and he has been doing well. The performance of prompt and aggressive surgical debridement in conjunction with the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics and advanced measures of critical care to combat the disastrous consequences of multiple Organ failure contributed greatly to improving the survival rate of victims of this dreadful entity. Sometimes preoperative imaging is helpful to assess the extent of the disease.Fig. 3 Well granulated wound which was closed subsequently.

Fig. 3

3 Discussion

J.A. Fournier described the condition as an idiopathic process, however, FG is rarely truly idiopathic, and with diligent observation and investigation, an underlying cause can be identified in the majority of cases. The necrotizing fasciitis frequently stems from an infection of the ano-rectum like our patient, uro-genitalia, genital skin, or Trauma including surgery to these regions. Fournier's gangrene has been shown to be strongly associated with diabetes, chronic alcoholism, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), lymphoproliferative diseases, chronic steroid abuse, cytotoxic drugs, malnutrition, and low socio-economic status Diabetes mellitus is the most commonly associated co-morbid condition, but controversy still exists as to whether or not diabetes mellitus is associated with increased mortality. But if diabetes mellitus is associated with chronic alcoholism, then it carries a bad prognosis [6], [7].

The variables that influence the outcome of patients with FG, in large part, remain controversial. Because many series in the clinical presentation have been small and heterogeneous, reliable criteria are still lacking and the statistical analysis remains limited. Some authors suggested the factors affecting the mortality as increasing age, primary anorectal infections, the existence of diabetes, delay in treatment, evidence of systemic sepsis at presentation, extent, and depth of involvement, formation of a diverting colostomy, a low hematocrit and serum albumin, and a high blood urea nitrogen, creatinine and alkaline phosphatase, our patient have a most of the above poor prognostic signs. Since he had clinical presentations consistent with necrotizing soft tissue infection, we didn't calculate the LRINEC Score [8].

Initially, FG was defined as an idiopathic entity, but a diligent search will show the source of infection in the vast majority of cases, as either perineal or genital skin infections. Anorectal or urogenital and perineal traumas, including pelvic and perineal injury or pelvic interventions, are other risk factors for FG. The most common foci include the gastrointestinal tract, followed by the genitourinary tract, and cutaneous injuries. Comorbid systemic disorders are being identified more and more in patients with FG, the commonest being diabetes mellitus and alcohol misuse. The emergence of HIV into epidemic proportions has opened up a huge population at risk for developing FG [9].

FG usually starts with perianal or perineal pain, often disproportionate to physical findings such as swelling or pruritus in the affected area. In many cases, the clinical presentation can be less clear and misleading. Patients may have a fever, malaise for a few days, nonspecific abdominal pain, general symptoms of infection without any specific symptoms from the perineal area, or signs of sepsis with tachycardia, volume depletion, anemia, increased serum creatinine, and electrolyte imbalance. The clinical scenario becomes clearer with the worsening of the cutaneous and subcutaneous inflammation and with the presence of typical skin necrosis. Dermal necrosis is rarely the first sign because it is the result of the thrombosis of the subcutaneous vessels. It is therefore the cutaneous manifestation of a more severe underlying infection. Crepitus is usually present due to the presence of gas-forming bacteria [10]. Diagnosis is based on clinical examination, during which the origin of the infection in many patients can be established. Because the delay in the treatment has a significant impact on the prognosis, radiological evaluation can speed up the diagnostic process in unclear cases. Scrotal ultrasound can exclude other causes of an “acute” scrotum, demonstrating normal testes and the presence of gas in the scrotal skin. Computed tomography (CT) scan can demonstrate thickening of the fascial planes, with the presence of gas, fat infiltration, and the eventual intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal progression of the infection [11]. Fournier's gangrene (FG) is an atypical, life-threatening polymicrobial infection caused mainly by Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus, and anaerobes. The infection is characterized by devastating, rapid soft tissue destruction predominantly affecting the perineal, perianal, and genital regions [12]. Both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria are involved in the development and pathogenesis of FG and multidrug-resistant bacteria are present in 20 % of the cases [13]. In patients with immunodeficiency, polymicrobial flora is usually involved with a synergic mechanism of aggressiveness [14]. In our case, no organism was grown on the culture.

Radiological techniques should be used to determine the extension of the disease rather than the diagnosis. For example, a plain film of the abdomen might be especially helpful in identifying air in soft tissue, whereas ultrasonography, CT, or magnetic resonance (MR) could be useful in determining the extension of the infection at the pelvic and abdominal wall. Imaging techniques are not routinely used for FG cases. Rather, careful exploration during surgical debridement has been the accepted method for determining the extent of the disease [15] [16].

All “medical” treatment for the infection, including broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy and hemodynamic stabilization, while of critical importance, should be considered perioperative adjunctive treatment. Gas gangrene has been noted to progress at the rate of 1 in. per hour. Because these patients are often in shock, vigorous fluid resuscitation and stabilization of the cardiopulmonary status should be instituted. Crystalloid fluid resuscitation is virtually always indicated. Volumes may be similar to those required for severe peritonitis. Colloids and blood transfusions may be necessary. Coagulopathy, respiratory insufficiency, and renal failure are not uncommon and must be aggressively addressed. Invasive monitoring and ventilatory support may be necessary for some instances. Empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy should be instituted, regardless of Gram's stain and culture results. The antibiotic regimen chosen must have a high degree of effectiveness against staphylococcal and streptococcal bacteria, gram-negative coliforms, Pseudomonas, Bacteroides, and Clostridium. Tetanus toxoid administration should also be considered as necessary [17].

With regard to hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) administration for the patient with necrotizing fasciitis, there are many benefits, including, but not limited to, a direct anaerobic bacterial effect, especially for clostridial species, a decrease in endotoxin activity, an increase in leukocytic phagocytosis, and a reduction in free radical production. However, the downside risk to placing a patient in an HBO chamber including the loss of medical control of the patient especially if the HBO chamber is not located on that medical center's campus should be considered. The risk versus benefit must be weighed very carefully in these extremely sick patients; nonetheless, if managed appropriately, HBO therapy is a useful clinical [4]. Negative Pressure Wound Therapy (NPWT) also known as vacuum-assisted closure is a therapeutic technique using a suction pump, tubing, and dressing to remove excess exudate. It has several advantages which include; increasing blood supply and inflammatory cell migration which enhances granulation tissue formation and eradication of bacteria and debris and it also promotes wound healing and reduces the need for reconstructive surgery like grafting [18].

Early surgical debridement is the primary component of treatment and if delayed will have a negative impact on the prognosis. All non-viable and necrotic tissue must be excised until well-perfused viable tissue is reached. The full extent of the disease may not be apparent from the areas of cutaneous involvement, which is usually less than the subcutaneous disease. Care must be taken not to accidentally open up deeper facial planes, which were not initially involved. Urinary or fecal diversion may be necessary depending upon the foci of origin of the disease. Multiple surgical debridements are the rule rather than the exception, with an average of 3.5 procedures required per patient. In our case debridement was done six times the last one for wound closure. We usually perform two to three debridements for patients with NF. Even though testes are classically spared in the process of FG, orchiectomy, for non-viable testis, is eventually required in up to 21 % of patients in our case we buried the testes to the medial thigh on the third debridement after local control was achieved [9]. At last, our patient claimed he was satisfied with the care he was provided.

4 Conclusion

Fournier's gangrene is a rapidly progressive, fulminant infection. With the institution of aggressive treatment, including early repeated surgical intervention, hemodynamic support, intensive care monitoring, and broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage, the disease has a greatly reduced mortality.

Abbreviations

CT computed tomography

FG Fournier's gangrene

HBO hyperbaric oxygen

HIV human immunodeficiency virus

ICU intensive care unit

IV intravenous

MR magnetic resonance

PO per os

Ethical clearance

The case report has been submitted for Ethical Board Review and approved as ethically sound report.

Consent

Written informed consent was taken from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review for the editor-in-chief of this journal on request.

Availability of data and materials

The authors of this manuscript are willing to provide any additional information regarding the case report.

Ethical approval

The case report has been submitted to the School of Medicine at University of Gondar for Ethical Board Review and approved as ethically sound report.

Funding

N/A.

Author contribution

Yohannis Derbew Molla: wrote the paper, collected pictures

Mezgebu Alemneh Assefa: collected pictures, wrote part of the paper

Aklilu Yiheyis Abraha: revised the paper and contribute to the paper as well

Guarantor

Dr. Aklilu Yiheyis.

Registration of research studies

N/A (not applicable).

Declaration of competing interest

N/A.

Acknowledgement

Not applicable.
