pmcINTRODUCTION

Necrotizing fasciitis (NF) is an acute progressive and life-threatening soft tissue infection primarily involving the superficial fascia and subcutaneous tissue. Early diagnosis and surgical intervention with broad-spectrum antibiotics and general supportive care can reduce mortality and amputation rates.1 Though the upper extremities are less frequently involved in NF than the lower, NF of the former is associated with a higher mortality rate and several intraoperative or postoperative complications.2,3 Among NF types in the upper extremities, axillary NF is quite rare and bears a high risk of iatrogenic nerve injuries.4 Here, we describe a case of a patient with right axillary NF and report the intraoperative procedure employed for preventing iatrogenic neurovascular injuries.

CASE REPORT

A 39-year-old man with skin flare-up and tenderness in the right upper limb was diagnosed with shock, and transferred to the emergency department of our hospital. The patient, a nursing home employee, was a non-smoker and denied the use of alcohol and illicit drugs. Visible scratches were made by a resident of the nursing home on his proximal right upper arm 7 days prior to his visit. It was a minor abrasion without scars at the time of the visit. He had a sore throat with fever 4 days prior to his visit. Vital signs on admission were as follows: temperature, 37.7 °C; heart rate, 133 bpm; blood pressure, 72/56 mmHg; 30 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 99% on a non-reservoir mask at 10 L/min of oxygen. On physical examination, erythema as well as swelling of the right upper arm (from axillary to elbow) and right lateral thorax with pain was present. (Figure 1)

Fig. 1 Physical findings at the time of the hospital visit

Erythema and swelling in the right upper arm (from axillary to elbow) and right lateral thorax (arrowheads).

There was no paralysis and contracture of the right hand or wrist. Blood test results revealed white blood cell count of 2.85×103/μL with 95.7% of neutrophils; hemoglobin, 12.2 g/dL; platelet, 9.3×104/μL; C-reactive protein, 45.36 mg/dL; total protein, 4.9 g/dL; albumin 2.2 g/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 210 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 156 U/L; total bilirubin 1.7 mg/dL; creatine kinase, 709 U/L; blood urea nitrogen, 61 mg/dL; creatinine, 4.9 mg/dL; sodium, 129 mEq/L; potassium, 3.8 mEq/L; chloride, 89 mEq/L; glucose, 108 mg/dL; presepsin, 2146 pg/mL; prothrombin time–International normalized ratio, 1.32; fibrinogen, 760.0 mg/dL; and antithrombin 3, 52.7%. Plane computed tomography (CT) scans revealed the change of CT value in the triceps brachii muscle and the latissimus dorsi muscle. (Figure 2)

Fig. 2 Computed tomography images at the time of the hospital visit

Plane computed tomography (CT) axial image at the level of proximal (left) and distal (right) right humerus. CT images revealed a change in the CT value in the triceps brachii muscle and the latissimus dorsi muscle (arrows).

The Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis (LRINEC) score was 9; therefore, it was concluded that the patient was undergoing shock and was in a tachypneic state. The emergency physician suspected NF and promptly contacted the orthopedic surgeon. Noradrenaline (0.15γ) and vasopressin (0.18 units/min) infusions along with administration of broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents (meropenem 1 × 3/day, vancomycin 500 mg/day, and clindamycin 600 mg × 2/day) were started after a large fluid infusion. Additionally, the trachea was intubated followed by ventilatory assistance. Due to the suspected NF, emergency surgery was performed under the right posterior axilla; next, a 25 cm incision was made in the dorsal side of the triceps brachii in the left decubitus position, followed by the extensive excision of the fascia. The contamination extended from the axilla to both the latissimus dorsi and distal side of triceps brachii with the presence of pus with a ‘dishwater’ like appearance. Contamination did not extend to the right forearm. Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. The results of two sets of blood cultures and intraoperative drainage cultures were positive for Streptococcus pyogenes. The flare of the right precordia exacerbated on day 4 of hospitalization. (Figure 3A)

Fig. 3 Infectious findings around the axilla

Fig. 3A: The flare of the right precordia is exacerbated (arrowheads).

Fig. 3B: Infectious findings around the axilla (arrowheads).

An incision was performed from the precordia to the medial elbow along with debridement of the contaminated tissues along the brachial artery, brachial vein, and peripheral nerves (median, ulnar, and musculocutaneous nerves) under general anesthesia. (Figure 3B) Nerves and vessels were marked with vessel tapes that were easy to detect in subsequent surgeries. (Figure 4)

Fig. 4 Marking nerves and vessels

Nerves and vessels marked with vessel tapes.

The wounds remained open and were cleaned daily in the intensive care unit. On hospitalization days 5 and 6, fasciotomy was added under local anesthesia due to suspicion of contamination of the pectoralis major fascia and right trapezius fascia. On hospitalization day 7, the patient was transferred from the intensive care unit to the ward as the skin flare-up had stopped spreading, and his vital signs had stabilized. On hospitalization day 9, ampicillin (12 g/day) and clindamycin (2400 mg/day) were administered, replacing the initial broad antibiotic therapy. The wounds remained open and were cleaned in the ward every day. On hospitalization day 15, only Klebsiella aerogenes was detected in the three wound cultures. The antimicrobial medication was changed to cefepime (4 g/day). On hospitalization day 19, a thorough debridement was performed under general anesthesia, and the locations of nerves and vessels were identified by checking the vessel tapes. (Figure 5)

Fig. 5 Identifying nerves and vessels by the vessel tapes

The locations of nerves and vessels indicated by the vessel tapes. The right image is an enlargement of the upper arm.

On hospitalization day 45, the wound was closed with a full-thickness skin graft, and the patient was discharged 81 days after admission. Cefepime (4 g/day) was administered until hospitalization day 36, followed by 4 weeks of oral minocycline (200 mg/day). No symptoms of nerve injuries were reported 12 months after the initial admission. The active shoulder range of motion (ROM) was flexion 155°, abduction 160°, external rotation 50°, and internal rotation 50°. The active elbow ROM was extension 0° and flexion 135°. (Figure 6)

Fig. 6 The final range of motion

Images of active shoulder flexion 155° and active elbow flexion 135°.

The active forearm ROM was pronation 80° and supination 90°. There were no ROM limitations in the wrist and the fingers. The hypertrophic scar contracture at the right axilla restricted the shoulder ROM.

DISCUSSION

NF incidence is reported in 0.4 cases/100000 people per year, and infection of the upper extremities is estimated to be 6.9%–10.1% of all cases.5 This study reports a rare case of axillary NF, which requires special management with respect to debridement.4 In particular, it is essential to repeat a thorough debridement to prevent the spread of infection. Even if limb amputation can be avoided, there is a risk of iatrogenic nerve injuries and subsequent loss of limb function due to repeated surgeries.6 Here, we highlight the convenience of marking the exposed nerves and blood vessels with vascular tapes during the initial surgery. This simplified the determination of the boundaries between the blood vessels and nerves, and different tissues even after an extended period. We believe that this procedure may not only lower the risk of neurovascular injuries and simplify subsequent surgeries, but also lead to a shorter operative time and reduce blood loss.

NF requires early diagnosis with antibiotics, surgical debridement, and amputation if needed, and leads to good outcomes.7 A high percentage (35%–85%) of the NF cases are initially diagnosed as cellulitis or abscess. The LRINEC score, a novel diagnostic scoring system for distinguishing NF from other soft tissue infections based on laboratory tests routinely performed for these cases, is a predictive tool to avoid misdiagnoses and, therefore, death or amputation.8 When the LRINEC score is ≥6, the positive predictive value is 92%, and the negative value is 96%.9 In this case, in addition to a score of 9, the patient underwent shock and entered a tachypneic state in the emergency room. Mortality is reported to be associated with septic shock, delay in surgery >24 h, creatininemia > 1.59 mg/dL, and LRINEC score ≥8.10 It could be assumed that the risk of fatality would be high only because of a >24 h delay in surgery. Prompt communication of suspected NF enabled the anesthesiologist to administer general anesthesia immediately, thus preventing mortality.

The episodes prior to the hospital visit included scratching by a resident 7 days prior and a sore throat with fever 4 days prior to his visit. Though difficult to ascertain, this may have been the cause of the NF. In several cases, an identifiable antecedent episode is evident, and the initial lesion can be as trivial as an insect bite, minor abrasion, boil, or injection site.11 Furthermore, streptococcal pharyngitis is a rare preceding symptom.11

CONCLUSION

This report discusses a rare case of axillary NF, which needed comprehensive management to prevent iatrogenic neurovascular injury in addition to a prompt surgical intervention for reducing mortality and amputation. The marking of nerves and blood vessels with vascular tapes during the initial surgery makes subsequent surgeries easier and may reduce iatrogenic neurovascular injury.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

None reported.

Abbreviations

NF necrotizing fasciitis

ROM range of motion
