pmc1 Introduction

Enterocutaneous fistulas are pathologies that are associated with high morbidity and mortality rates that can vary up to 7–25 % in some series [1,2]. Previous literature has suggested that in the vast majority of cases, these enterocutaneous fistulas are usually secondary to cancerous processes developing in the digestive tract [2]. However, the reverse development, i.e., the appearance of cancer in a chronic enterocutaneous fistula has been rarely described [2].

The development of squamous cell carcinoma within a chronic enterocutaneous fistula is a rarely documented phenomenon [2]. Some studies have reported cases of malignant transformation in fistulas associated with Crohn's disease [3]. In such instances, the distal disease tends to be chronic and resistant to treatment [3]. Although a specific pathophysiological cascade explaining the occurrence of squamous cell carcinoma within an enterocutaneous fistula has not yet been elucidated, some researchers have proposed a potential link between cancer and chronic inflammation [4,5]. This association suggests that prolonged exposure to chronic inflammation due to infections, chemical irritants, and non-digestible materials could lead to lymphoreticular infiltrate, ultimately triggering the development of a cancerous tumor [6].

Furthermore, the diagnosis of this condition typically occurs when patients are in an advanced stage of the disease, often affecting elderly individuals, making curative treatment an unlikely management option [2]. The literature on malignant transformations of meshwork-related enterocutaneous fistulas is even more limited.

Our case presents a man in his 8th decade, with prior history of open necrosectomy, who presented to the service and was diagnosed with a giant squamous cell carcinoma developed on a mesh-related enterocutaneous fistula, whose mesh that led to the development of the enterocutaneous fistula was 22 years old. Here, we discuss the clinical events that the patient underwent that might have led to an earlier investigation. In addition, we provide a brief review of the literature on this rare pathophysiologic cascade following SCARE guidelines [7].

2 Presentation of the case

After ethical and institutional approval, previous informed consent was filled. A 66-year-old patient with a medical history of coronary syndrome (requiring dual platelet antiaggregant therapy), chronic kidney failure, arterial hypertension, gout arthritis, obesity, and hyperlipidemia. In 2000, the patient presented necrotizing pancreatitis approached through open necrosectomy. He required a prolonged open abdomen and developed an incisional hernia which was repaired using a synthetic mesh.

In 2022, the patient was hospitalized because of hypovolemic shock due to gastrointestinal bleeding. In the physical exam, an abdominal wound with mesh exposition and cloudy discharge was observed. A high output enterocutaneous fistula diagnosis was established, oral intake was suppressed and management with a subatmospheric pressure device with periodical changes, parenteral nutrition, and somatostatin analogous was started. During the hospital stay, the patient presented multiple episodes of fistula bleeding and infection, requiring intensive care unit attention, blood transfusions, antibiotics, and antifungal management. However, the fistula did not show proper output reduction and healing, and due to the recurrent bleeding and septic episodes, the patient's case was exposed to the institutional surgery committee, and a surgical approach was defined.

Based on the patient's surgical history, severe peritoneal adherence syndrome was expected, and using computed tomography images laparoscopic access with a low risk of enterotomy was defined in the right iliac fossa. Two 12 mm ports were placed in the right iliac fossa and, using a laparoscopic view, peritoneal adhesion lysis was carried out releasing the abdominal wall in the hypogastrium paramedian space. Then, a paramedian laparotomy was performed to continue the peritoneal adherence lysis (Fig. 1, Fig. 2). A 30 cm diameter parietectomy was performed, and a 60 cm en-bloc resection of the involved small bowel was done (starting 140 cm away from the Treitz angle and ending 100 cm before the ileocaecal valve) (Fig. 3, Fig. 4). Enteric anastomosis using mechanical sutures was performed and reinforced using absorbable sutures. The open abdomen was covered with a subatmospheric pressure device, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit.Fig. 1 Frontal view of paramedian laparotomy.

Fig. 1

Fig. 2 Lateral view of paramedian laparotomy.

Fig. 2

Fig. 3 Surgical specimen.

Fig. 3

Fig. 4 En-bloc resection of the involved small bowel.

Fig. 4

Pathology analysis reports a keratinizing and infiltrating giant cell squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), moderate and low differentiated, which involves all the skin depth, subcutaneous cellular tissue, and the intestinal wall of all the enterocutaneous fistula. Resection margins were negative for tumor invasion. Additionally, the evaluated skin presented keloid scaring and foreign body reactions.

Two days after the procedure patient presented clinical deterioration requiring higher respiratory and hemodynamic support, and the abdominal drainage turned cloudy. A second surgical approach was performed by observing anastomosis dehiscence. Anastomosis resection was carried out, new enteric anastomosis was deferred due to severe intestinal edema, and a new subatmospheric pressure device was placed. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit with a nasogastric tube. During the next 48 h, the patient presented septic shock and was newly surgically approached finding necrotizing fasciitis of the abdominal wall borders. Debridement was performed and the subatmospheric pressure device was replaced. Unfortunately, in the next 24 h, the patient presented respiratory and hemodynamic status deterioration and died.

3 Discussion

Enterocutaneous fistulas (EF) are pathologies that are defined as the communication that originates between the gastrointestinal tract and the skin over the abdominal wall [8]. This condition usually develops secondary to abdominal surgery procedures, trauma, and other diseases of the gastrointestinal tract [1]. Over the years, the management of enterocutaneous fistulas continues to be a problem of great surgical complexity, especially because these patients usually present hypovolemic episodes, long hospital stays, and sepsis [1]. Likewise, it represents a negative impact on the quality of life of patients, since it is a treatment that tends to require years to be curative [8].

As mentioned above, enterocutaneous fistulas also tend to develop as a complication of abdominal surgery, which in a large number of cases, is due to the use of prosthetic mesh repair of incisional hernias, management that presents with low rates of reproductions but a higher incidence of complications, being EF development one of them [[9], [10], [11]]. In our case, the history of open necrosectomy required the use of a prosthetic mesh in our patient. However, this condition is rare, it is presented in 0–2 % [11], but is associated with higher morbidity and mortality [10].

Additionally, the malignant degeneration on EF is even more infrequent. This condition has been mainly described in association with Crohn's disease [2,3,12]. Similar cases in a skin-grafted ileostomy, pilonidal cyst, colo-cutaneous and perianal fistula have been published [2,13,14]. However, to date, there is no report of a malignant condition such as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) development on mesh-related enterocutaneous fistula.

The pathophysiology of SCC on EF has not been described yet. Nevertheless, it is hypothesized that chronic inflammation found in EF epitheliums is similar to that observed in chronic scars and ulcers [12,[15], [16], [17]]. Constant tissue injury carries to epithelial regeneration, dysplasia, and carcinoma development, and this is mediated by the infiltration of inflammatory cells that provoke the release of tumor factors and cytokines that affect the cellular life cycle and angiogenesis, which occurs at the same time that oxygen-free radicals and other toxic mediators secondary to the inflammatory response are released, causing oxidative damage, thus altering the cellular nitrogenous bases [6,18,19]. This leads to the malignant development of lesions such as that of our patient, who was exposed to a severe inflammatory pattern secondary to his pancreatitis and consequently was exposed to a long-lasting foreign body that led to a chronic inflammatory process that triggered a malignant conversion [6].

It is difficult to diagnose and manage SCC on EF. In our case, the diagnosis was made incidentally. However, it is suggested that exacerbation of local signs and symptoms should raise cancer suspicion [12,17]. The recommendations for the treatment of enterocutaneous fistulas are usually based on resuscitation of the patient's volume, early diagnosis, and treatment of sepsis, early evaluation and management of the fistula, and nutritional and multidisciplinary approach [1]. However, there is no standardized protocol for the management of the SCC on EF. Additionally, some experiences of radical surgery and chemoradiation have been published [3]. These are in patients with SCC on Crohn's disease-related fistulas [3]. In our case, since a negative margin resection was carried out, additional chemoradiotherapy was not required.

To our knowledge, this is the first report of a patient who has developed giant squamous cell carcinoma secondary to an enterocutaneous fistula derived from the use of mesh. This is a case that provides important information for all physicians who may be faced with cases like this one, which demonstrate the development of a very rare pathology that, when it develops, has high mortality rates due to the time delay from the onset of the disease to diagnosis. The rapid clinical identification of cases with similar pathologies could lead to a rapid improvement in the short-term prognosis of these patients and delay the development of malignant conditions.

4 Conclusion

The development of SCC on a mesh-related enterocutaneous fistula (EF) is a rare condition. Classic signs and symptoms to identify this condition are not well-defined, making early diagnosis challenging. However, in cases of non-healing chronic fistulas, maintaining clinical suspicion could aid in the early detection of malignancy and potentially improve patient outcomes.

Provenance and peer review

Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed.

Consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.

Ethical approval

Ethical approval of the institutional committee was made previous publication under the number CCEI-15298.2023.

Registration of research studies

None.

Funding information

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Roosevelt Fajardo, MD: Participated in drafting the article and revising it critically for important intellectual content.

Juan Daniel Pedraza, MD: Made substantial contributions to conception and design, acquisition of data, analysis, and interpretation of data.

Ricardo E. Núñez Rocha: Participated in drafting the article and revising it critically for important intellectual content.

Daniel Gómez: Participated in drafting the article and revising it critically for important intellectual content.

Rocío López, MD: Participated in drafting the article and revising it critically for important intellectual content.

Felipe Girón, MD, MSc: Participated in drafting the article and revising it critically for important intellectual content.

All authors have revised and approved the final version of the manuscript.

Guarantor

Roosevelt Fajardo, MD.

Declaration of competing interest

Nothing to disclose.

Acknowledgments

To our patient.
