pmc1 Case presentation

A 34-year-old Chinese man, with recurrent fever and rigors since five months, presented to the Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine in the Hospital of Xi'an International Medical Center, China. Five months prior to hospital admission, the patient complained of high fever with chills and right leg pain for three days, and was admitted to a county hospital. The lung and soft tissue infections were considered as an initial diagnosis and antibiotics were given during the hospital stay. Two days after admission, the condition of the patient worsened, and the patient experienced dyspnea and cough with chest pain. The patient was transferred to a hospital in Xi'an City, where he was admitted with complaints of high fever, chills and dyspnea. Blood tests indicated an elevation in white blood cell (WBC) counts (16 × 109/L) with a high neutrophil percentage (89%), and the procalcitonin (PCT) level was markedly increased (3.4 ng/mL). The chest computed tomography (CT) image showed the lung infection with encapsulated effusion (Fig. 1a and b). An abscess in the soft tissues of the right lower leg was observed. Incision and drainage of the abscess was performed, and antibiotic therapy with ceftazidime was administered at a dose of 1.5g/12h daily. After 5 days, the drainage culture revealed the growth of Proteus vulgaris from the incision wound. Imipenem was infused at a dose of 1 g/8 h daily, followed by a sulbactam/cefoperazone infusion. After 10 days, the patient's temperature remained within 37.0 °C, respiratory symptoms improved, and the leg wound had coalesced. However, 5 days after discontinuation of antibiotics, the patient reported back to the facility with recurrent fever, cough, and chills. After 2 weeks of hospital stay, the blood culture tests revealed the growth of Morganella morganii (M. Morganii), that was resistant to imipenem and sensitive to cefoperazone/sulbactam. Sulperazone was infused until the patient was discharged from the hospital. However, after discontinuing the antibiotic infusion, fever with chills and cough recurred. For the next 3 months, the patient received antibiotic therapy repeatedly. Despite continuous antibiotic treatment, recurrent high fever with chills along with pneumonia persisted. The patient was transferred to our hospital in April 2022. At the time of admission, the patient complained of higher fever, chills, chest pain, cough, and fatigue. The patient did not have a history of cardiac disease or of having undergone any invasive procedure, and was not an intravenous drug abuser. The patient never drank to much, and the HIV was negative. In the previous admissions, any central venous catheterization had not been performed in the patient.Fig. 1 CT scan of thorax taken on admission to the Xi'an Hospital. CT image

showed lung infection with encapsulated effusion (Figure1 a,b).

Fig. 1

Physical examination findings: On physical examination, the vital signs indicated tachycardia (110 beats/min), blood pressure of 108/70 mmHg, temperature of 40.2 °C, respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 96% on 2 L/min nasal cannula. He had a grade II systolic murmur best heard at the right lower sternal border. Physical examination including that of the skin and neurologic examination were otherwise unremarkable. The subcutaneous hemorrhagic spot, undernail linear hemorrhage, and ROTH spot in the retina were not presented in the patient.

Laboratory findings: Complete blood count demonstrated a normal leukocyte count (8.6 × 109/L) and elevated neutrophil percentage (76%). The CRP level was elevated at 127 mg/L (normal range <10 mg/L), ESR was significantly increased to 127 mm/h., and Kidney and liver functions, PCT level, electrolytes, NT-proBNP were normal. HIV in his blood sample was negative, and the autoantibidies was also negative. The B lymphocyte count was normal (29%), and the immunoglobulin gamma were in normal range (IgA:1.04g/L, IgG: 11.7gL, IgM:2.13g/L, IgE:25IU/mL), and the lymphocyte subpopulations were normal (CD3+ = 83%, CD3++CD4+ = 34%, CD3++CD8+ = 43%, CD3++CD4+/CD4++CD8+ = 0.79). A CT scan of the thorax revealed bilateral pulmonary inflammatory shadows (Fig. 2), which were different from those in his previous CT image. ECG revealed sinus tachycardia. Five days later, an additional blood culture test revealed the growth of M. morganii, which was resistant to piperacillin, tazobactam, and imipenem, but sensitive to cefoperazone/sulbactam. Next generation sequencing (NGS) confirmed DNA of M. morganii in the blood sample. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated a rough tricuspid tip with vegetations (Fig. 3 a,b) on the anterior tendon cord. Colour Doppler showed that the colour flow returned at the tricuspid root, and interrupted anterior valve continuity, and regurgitation was observed at the tricuspid closure (Fig. 3c) in moderate amounts. This was considered a perforation in the tricuspid valve.Fig. 2 CT scan on admission to our hospital. CT image of the thorax showed that there were infections in both lungs, which were at different sites than those of the lungs from the earlier CT image; encapsulated effusion was not present.

Fig. 2

Fig. 3 TTE at admission (Apr. 23.2022).Multiple sections of TTE show that the tricuspid tip is rough, with strong echo attachment (vegetation, Fig. 3a and b) on the anterior tendon cord, displaying a size of 15 × 13 mm, swinging by the cardiac movement cycle. Colour Doppler shows that 3–4 mm wide colour flow returned to the tricuspid root (Fig. 3b), and interrupted anterior valve continuity. Multi-section TTE shows tricuspid regurgitation at the tricuspid closure (Fig. 3c) in moderate amount. (RV, right ventricle; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; LA, left Atrium; TV,tricuspid). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

Fig. 3

Taking into account two positive major criteria (positive blood cultures, and echocardiographic evidence of valvular vegetations with new regurgitation.) [1,2], a definite diagnosis of infective endocarditis (IE) was confirmed, which was induced by M. morganii, a rare pathogen and an extremely rare agent involved in IE. In particular, it was unusual in an immunocompetent patient without underlying valvular abnormalities.

2 Clinical course

According to the bacterial sensitivity spectrum, the patient was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics, cefoperazone/sulbactam with amikacin, which were infused for three weeks. During the treatment with antibiotics, the patient had several episodes of fever with chills. There were the following surgical indications, the isolated tricuspid vegetation, suspective perforation on the valve by TTE, and persistent sepsis [3].

After three weeks, an open-heart surgery was performed via median sternotomy using moderately hypothermic (30–32 °C) cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), the vegetation on the tricuspid valve (Fig. 4) was observed as described by both transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) during operation and the previous TTE examinations. The vegetation on the tricuspid valve was curetted and the suspicious perforation was not found on the tricuspid valve. It was repaired by tricuspid valvuloplasty. A bacterial culture of the vegetation from the tricuspid valve was performed, which identified the growth of M. morganii. The result was the same as that of the blood culture. After the operation, the patient recovered quickly, and pneumonia and fever did not relapse for over four months. Following up with a TTE in August 2022, the heart function of the patient was normal, and the tricuspid valve closed and opened normally, despite being rough, with a small amount of regurgitation (Fig. 5). Following up with a thoracic CT scan, pulmonary infections were completely cured on day 20 after discharge, and has not relapsed so far.Fig. 4 On May 16. 2022, The vegetation from tricuspid valve was15 × 13 × 10 mm in size. TTE taken 70 days after surgery.

Fig. 4

Fig. 5 TTE taken 70 days after surgery. TTE demonstrates that the size of each cardiac cavity and the internal diameter of large vessels were within the normal range, with 61% EF. Multiple sections of TTE show that tricuspid tip is rough without vegetations, with tricuspid regurgitation in small amounts.

Fig. 5

We confirm in the “Case presentation” section of our paper that the patient whose data or images are included in the publication have consented for all images and clinical data and other data included in the manuscript to be published.

3 Discussion

Infective endocarditis (IE) is an infection of the heart endocardium with significant morbidity and mortality [[1], [2], [3]]. IE is defined by the modified Duke criteria in which the identification of a causative bacterium and echocardiographic evidence of endocardial infection are the major criteria [1]. The most common pathogens of IE are the encapsulated bacteria, gram-positive cocci [1,2]. Gram negative bacteria do not commonly induce IE [4,6,8,9]. M. morganii has been rarely identified as a cause of bacteraemia, it occurs mostly in immunocompromised patients [5,7]. We present an extremely rare case of M. morganii induced IE in an immunocompetent patient without underlying valvular abnormalities. We consider several features of this case report unique. First, IE is seldom diagnosed in patients without underlying valvular abnormalities, such as stenotic or regurgitant valves, valve prostheses or recent surgery, or a cardiovascular procedure involving catherization [[1], [2], [3],9]. Escherichia coli affects native valves without degenerative valvulopathy rather than prosthetic valves, especially in patients with risk factors such as an immunosuppressive status, excessive alcohol consumption, or treatment with hemodialysis. Peripheral embolization, congestive heart failure, and valve-ring abscesses are major complications of E. coli endocarditis [4,8,9]. Our patient neither suffered from heart diseases, including valvular abnormalities, nor had undergone any invasive procedure of the vascular pathway, as proven by TTE inspections, which showed that the size of each cardiac cavity and the internal diameter of large vessels were within the normal range, and the mitral, aortic and pulmonic valves were in normal condition, except for the tricuspid lesion. Right-sided IE is fairly rare [4,9]. IE related to peripheral lines is uncommon. However, local cellulitis, use of infusion pumps, and insertion of a cannula in the lower extremities have been shown to be independent risk factors for right-sided IE [4,9]. In our case, the IE lesion was implicated only with the tricuspid valve, without involving any other valves, which is why the pulmonary infections occurred repeatedly. Second, the gram-positive cocci, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Enterococcus faecalis are the most common pathogens of IE [1,2]. It is rarely induced by Escherichia coli or other gram negative bacteria [4,6,8,9]. An extremely rare case has been described in which a patient reported with IE caused by M. morganii, who suffered from multiple myeloma and received high dosages of corticosteroids, chemotherapy and immunomodulatory agents, and rapidly succumbed to the illness [5]. M. morganii is a gram-negative rod-shaped bacterium that is naturally present in the gastrointestinal tract and rarely causes disease in healthy individuals. Bacteraemia induced by M. morganii has been described mostly in immunocompromised patients [7]. Our patient was an immunocompetent young man with a negative HIV, the B lymphocyte count, immunoglobulin level and lymphocyte subpopulations were in normal range, and the patient had not received any immunosuppressants. Nevertheless, two blood culture tests demonstrated the growth of M. morganii, which was further confirmed by an NGS test, as well as a culture of vegetation from the heart. All the evidence confirmed that M. morganii was the causative pathogen of the endocarditis in this case. The growth of Proteus vulgaris in the abscess excretion was most likely a different pathogen in the soft tissue wound, and the local cellulitis might be related to the M. morganii induced IE [9]. Third, the most important risk factors of IE are intravenous drug abuse and implanted foreign material as well as central venous catheterization [[1], [2], [3],9]. Our patient refused to take drugs in reality, had never received implanted foreign material, and did not undergo any invasive cardiovascular procedure including central venous catheterization.

This case revealed that TTE imaging is a very important investigation to demonstrate endocarditis, which is absolutely necessary for a patient with recurrent fever and blood stream infection. In the early stage, the patient did not undergo TTE examination due to the lack of understanding for IE by the doctors during previous admissions. In addition, for the treatment of M. morganii induced IE, intrinsic resistance to β-lactam antibiotics may lead to delay of adequate empiric treatment, which further underscores the importance of this microorganism, broad-spectrum antibiotics with β-lactam enzyme inhibition should be timely administered. Early operation to clear away the vegetation and repair the damaged valve are also important methods for treating acute endocarditis in the patients without underlying valvular abnormalities, and with valve perforation and persistent sepsis. In our case, one of indications for the operation was the suspicious tricuspid perforation by TTE (Colour Doppler shows that 3–4 mm wide colour flow returned to the tricuspid root, and interrupted anterior valve continuity). However, we did not found a perforation in the tricuspid valve after operation.

4 Conclusion

This was a unique case of IE induced by an extremely rare agent in an immunocompetent patient without underlying valvular abnormalities. TTE imaging is a crucial examination to investigate suspicious endocarditis. Broad-antibiotics with β-lactam enzyme inhibition should be used on time for M. morganii induced IE with bacteraemia, and the operation to curette the vegetation and repair the tricuspid is also an important way to cure endocarditis in the patients without underlying valvular abnormalities, and with persistent sepsis and lung infections.

Author contribution statement

All authors listed have significantly contributed to the investigation, development and writing of this article.

Data availability statement

Data included in article/supp. material/referenced in article.

Additional information

No additional information is available for this paper.

Declaration of competing interest

We All other authors declare no competing interests. The corresponding author had full access to all data and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

☆ The Ethics Committee of Xi'an International Medical Center Hospital approved the study. In the case study, we obtained informed consent from the ethics committee and the patient himself and his family members. This study complies with all of the regulations.
