pmcIntroduction

Highlights

Covid-19 is a systemic viral disease complicated with medical conditions that surprise healthcare professionals.

Rhabdomyolysis is a serious condition that can be fatal or cause disability.

Rhabdomyolysis cases have been reported in COVID-19 patients.

Early diagnosis of this complication is essential to avoid serious complications or death by initiating the management.

Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) infection is responsible since 2019 for a respiratory illness with varying severity worldwide1. Extra-respiratory manifestations of this disease, which have been described and widespread concerned as public health, included the musculoskeletal involvements (MSK) such as fatigue, myalgia and myositis, arthralgia, symmetrical or poly-articular arthritis, reactive arthritis, new-onset backache, osteoporosis, aseptic osteonecrosis2–4. The prevalence of MSK manifestations is 30%, according to studies4,5. MSK manifestations of COVID-19 infection are fatigue, arthralgia and arthritis, myalgia and myositis, new-onset backache, osteoporosis, and aseptic necrosis4. Rhabdomyolysis is a serious condition that can be fatal or cause disability6. It occurs when the death muscle tissue releases its proteins and electrolytes into the blood stream, complicated by acute renal failure, metabolic acidosis, disseminated intravenous coagulation, and cardiac arrest7,8. The etiologies are multiple, including muscle compression, alcohol, medications, malignant hyperthermia, infections, and others. Infections that can cause rhabdomyolysis are variables that include bacterial, viral, and other infections. Viruses include respiratory viruses such as influenza and para influenza viruses9,10. COVID-19 is mainly a respiratory virus. Patients who present classic clinical manifestations and laboratorial diagnostic tests are estimated at less than 10%9. Severe rhabdomyolysis during the COVID-19 course is not until now well known11. For that, we present a case of rhabdomyolysis during COVID-19 infection.

All our cases has been reported in line with THE CARE 2017 guidelines12 and THE SCARE 2020 criteria13.

Case presentation

A 48-year-old non-alcoholic, non-smoker female patient presented to our out-hospital clinic in Al-Sham Medical Complex Hospital, Damascus, Syria, with a cough, generalized myalgia and arthralgia, and fever during the last week. Her physical examination revealed: a temperature; of 36.9°C, pulse of 76/m, blood pressure=132/78 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 96% in room air. The body mass index was 26. The clinical examination only revealed diffuse arthralgia and myalgia. She had no previous medical history. She had had no chronic diseases, or previous treatment with any medication. She had no previous medical family history, such as genetic disease, cancer, blood hypertension, or diabetes mellitus. Laboratory results revealed: an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 42 m/h (N=0-20), elevated C-reactive protein level of 16 mg/dl(N=0-6), and elevated creatine kinase levels at 12 700 IU/l (N=200). The remain tests were unremarkable. The nasopharyngeal swab confirmed the diagnosis of coronavirus 2 RNA infection. Gene Finder COVID-19 and real amp Kit has been used through reverse Transcription and real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction from RNA extracted from nasopharyngeal swab (ELITe InGenius, France). The viral stain is not known. The patient had mild disease, according to the WHO classification14. Computed tomography showed mild pulmonary infiltrations (Fig. 1).

Figure 1 Computed tomography revealed mild pulmonary infiltrations.

She was hospitalized in the COVID-19 isolation department. Three days later, she was admitted to the intensive care unit for confusion, high fever (39.8 °C), tachycardia (125/m), hypotension (75/40 mmHg), and a Glasgow score of 10/15. Laboratory test results were: White blood cells 10 000, with normal differentiation, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 61 m/h, C-reactive protein level 36 mg/dl, Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) 542310 IU, myoglobin more than 15 000 g/l, Aspartate aminotransferase 1246U/L, Alanine aminotransferase 986U/l, urea 154, and creatinine 2.8. The rest of the laboratory tests were normal, including troponin level, and D-dimer. She was treated with 12 l/min oxygen, intravenous normal saline, with 1.4%bicarbonate and epinephrine, azithromycin, methyl prednisone 250 mg/IV/ day for 3 days, and enoxaparine 4000 IU/SC/day. She was intubated and mechanically ventilated, and had dialysis therapy due to anuria, metabolic acidosis, and hyperkalemia. The next day, our patient died because of cardiac arrest due to continuous hemodynamic deterioration.

Discussion

Rhabdomyolysis is characterized by different symptoms and signs such as muscle pain, abdominal pain, fever, confusion or lack of consciousness, tachycardia, dark red or brown urine, or decreased urination7–10. Our patient had presented with generalized myalgia, confusion, high fever (39.8 °C), tachycardia, and anuria. Blood tests revealed elevated creatine kinase and myoglobinuria. CPK is the most sensitive laboratory test, as muscle damage occurs from a level of CPK greater than 5000 U/l, but; there is no correlation between its elevation and the muscle injury severity or renal failure. Very high levels of potassium, elevated liver enzymes, and elevated creatinine are predictors of severity8,9,15. Our patient had very elevated levels of CPK, myoglobin, liver enzymes, and creatinine. Treatment with intravenous fluids to prevent kidney failure, management of electrolyte abnormalities like potassium, calcium, and phosphorus, and rarely dialysis15,16, like in our case. In some cases, the intensive care unit is needed for close monitoring. Most causes of rhabdomyolysis are reversible, but the rest may end with death9,10, like our patient. The most common reported musculoskeletal manifestations of COVID-19 infection include fatigue, myalgia and myositis, arthralgia, symmetrical or poly-articular arthritis, reactive arthritis, new-onset backache, osteoporosis, aseptic osteonecrosis1–5. Severe rhabdomyolysis during the COVID-19 infection course is not well known11. The exact mechanism of this manifestation is not yet known but may be due to some possible causes, such as the direct viral invasion of myocytes, leading to muscles necrosis, the effect of inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines and the tissue hypoxia17,18. Early diagnosis of this complication is essential to avoid serious complications or death by initiating the management9,10. So, myoglobin measurement in patients with severe forms of COVID-19 might change therapeutic options.

Conclusion

Rhabdomyolysis cases have been reported in COVID-19 patients. Further studies are needed to understand the mechanism and to optimize the treatment.

Ethical approval

Institutional review board approval is not required for deidentified single case reports or histories based on institutional policies.

Consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s mother for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.

Source of funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Author contribution

All authors contributed to the development of the manuscript and the care of the patient presented. All authors approved the final manuscript.

Conflicts of interest disclosure

The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Research registration unique identifying number (UIN)

None.

Guarantor

Dr Maysoun Kudsi.

Provenance and peer review

Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed.

Sponsorships or competing interests that may be relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this article.

Published online 5 June 2023
