pmcIntroduction

Neurolept malignant syndrome (NMS) is a serious, rare, and potentially fatal idiosyncratic reaction usually to first-generation anti-psychotics and also to second-generation anti-psychotics (though rarely) and sometimes to anti-emetic drugs.[1] There is also a risk of the development of NMS if there is an abrupt withdrawal of the dopamine agonist drug used in a Parkinson’s disease patient. NMS carries an overall mortality risk of 22% if left undiagnosed and not timely treated.[2]

Usually, second-generation anti-psychotics are considered better in respect of their side effect profile. The development of NMS is directly related to the dosage of anti-psychotic medication and the host’s susceptibility.

NMS classically manifests acutely with hyperpyrexia, which is not responsive to anti-pyretics such as paracetamol, mental status changes, dysautonomia, and muscular rigidity. However, an infrequently low body temperature can be encountered in elderly individuals particularly with second-generation anti-psychotics.

Mortality in NMS is increased in the presence of rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria, and acute renal failure. Prompt withdrawal of the offending drug, drugs like benzodiazepines, dantrolene, and bromocriptine; reduction of body temperature; and management of renal failure if any constitute the backbone of NMS management.

We report a case of a 67-year-old man who was being treated with second-generation anti-psychotics, who reported with hyperthermia, accelerated hypertension, rigidity, and altered sensorium. The patient suffered from intra-cranial bleed (IC bleed) post-hospitalisation because of uncontrolled hypertension.

Case Report

A 67-year-old Indian male, with co-morbidities of type 2 diabetes mellitus, primary hypothyroidism, and depression presented to us with fever, stupor, and generalized rigidity of 1 day duration. The patient was already taking gliclazide 80 mg once before breakfast, thyroxine 75 mcg once on empty stomach, and venlafaxine 75 mg twice daily for 3 years. For the past 3 days, his family members observed that he was becoming agitated with some visual and auditory hallucinations. He was taken to his psychiatrist a day before he presented to us. He was prescribed olanzapine 2.5 mg once at bed time along with clonazepam 0.5 mg on as-needed basis.

On examination, he was conscious but talking irrelevant. Mini-mental status examination was not possible, so evaluation of speech and memory was not performed. He was febrile (a temperature of 104°F), the pulse was 140 beats/min (regular with no variation in limbs or apex pulse deficit), and the blood pressure was 180/130 mm Hg in the right arm supine. He also had symmetric rigidity in all four limbs and the trunk with preserved deep tendon reflexes (DTRs), with no hyperreflexia and absent clonus. Plantar reflex was flexor bilaterally. Pupils were 3 mm bilaterally equal and reacting to light. The patient remained febrile despite intravenous fluids and intravenous paracetamol 1 gram along with physical cooling. His blood pressure also remained labile despite intravenous infusion of labetalol in the emergency room.

Blood was drawn for cultures, routine haematology, and bio-chemistries along with creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) levels [Table 1]. Urgent non-contrast computerised tomography (NCCT) head was performed, which was normal, and cerebro-spinal fluid analysis was unremarkable.

Table 1 Routine haematology and biochemistry

Investigations	Result	Normal value	
Haemoglobin	14.9 gm%	13-17 gm%	
TLC	13400 cells/mm3	4000-10000 cells/mm3	
Urea	62 mg/dl	10-48.5 mg/dl	
Creatinine	1.4 mg/dl	0.7-1.3 mg/dl	
Na+/K+	144/4.4 mmol/L	136-145/3.5-5.1 mmol/L	
CPK	884 U/L	39-190 U/L	
Serum myoglobin	552 ng/mL	17.4-105.7 ng/mL	
Urine myoglobin	280 ng/mL	<5 ng/mL	
ALT	88 U/L	10-50 U/L	
AST	130 U/L	0-40 U/L	

The patient was shifted to an intensive care unit for further management. He was intubated and was kept on mechanical ventilatory support. In view of generalised rigidity, hyperpyrexia, and neurological impairment, the patient was started on dantrolene 25 mg twice daily and bromocriptine 2.5 mg thrice daily through Ryle’s tube along with broad spectrum antibiotics and supportive treatment.

After approximately 12 hours into hospitalisation, the patient developed sudden neurological deterioration in the form of right extensor plantar response and right hemiparesis. Urgent NCCT head was performed, which revealed acute haemorrhage in the left frontal, deep and peri-ventricular white matter, reaching up to the left basal ganglia with mild surrounding edema indenting the left temporal horn [Figure 1]. The patient was conservatively managed with close watch of labile blood pressure, which gradually settled with anti-hypertensives.

Figure 1 NCCT head showing acute haemorrhage in the left frontal, deep and peri-ventricular white matter, reaching up to the left basal ganglia with mild surrounding edema indenting the left temporal horn (red arrow)

During the course of stay in the hospital, the patient developed poly-microbial sepsis along with hospital-acquired pneumonia, which required escalation of antibiotics as per the culture reports along with anti-fungal drugs. CPK values declined from an initial high of 884 to 55 in a span of 8 days. The patient was tracheostomised in view of prolonged intubation. Gradual weaning trial was given, and the patient had uneventful recovery. He was discharged to home with mild residual weakness in the right upper and lower limb.

Discussion

NMS is a rare and an unpredictable complication usually to first-generation anti-psychotics and also to second-generation anti-psychotics and sometimes to anti-emetic drugs.[1] It can be a potential mis-diagnosis of fever in older patients who are frequently on anti-psychotics for a variety of reasons. Undiagnosed and untreated, fatality rates remain high.

Levenson’s criteria have been widely accepted for the diagnosis of NMS. The major criteria are fever, rigidity, and raised CPK levels, and minor criteria are dysautonomia (tachycardia, labile blood pressure), tachypnoea, diaphoresis, and leukocytosis.[3] The presence of all three major or two major and four minor criteria is confirmatory for NMS. Our patient fulfilled all three major criteria.

The differential diagnosis of NMS includes serotonin syndrome, malignant hyperthermia, central nervous system infections, lethal catatonia, anti-cholinergic/lithium toxicity, or heat stroke. NMS is characterised by “lead pipe rigidity”, whereas serotonin syndrome is characterised by hyperreflexia, clonus, and dilated pupils.[14]

The most common typical (first-generation) anti-psychotics implicated in the development of NMS in the order of the most common to least common are haloperidol > chlorpromazine > fluphenazine > levomepromazine > loxapine.[1]

Atypical (second-generation) anti-psychotics such as clozapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone, though with a low risk, have also been implicated in the development of NMS. The major risk factor in the development of NMS is rapid change in neuroleptic dose or initiation of neuroleptic drugs in patients who are at risk of the development of NMS, such as patients who are de-hydrated or have concomitant lithium, anti-cholinergic, or anti-depressant usage.

The most important complications associated with NMS are rhabdomyolysis, acute renal failure, acute respiratory failure, seizures, myocardial infarction, global cerebral dysfunction or injury, and multi-organ failure.[5]

Management of NMS consists of recognition of clinical features suggestive of NMS, discontinuation of the offending drugs, supportive therapy in the form of physical cooling, IV fluids ensuring good diuresis, prevention of aspiration, and airway protection.

Autonomic instability should be managed with benzodiazepines and IV anti-hypertensive drugs which can be titrated as per clinical response. A skeletal muscle-relaxing agent, dantrolene, and a dopamine agonist, bromocriptine, can be used for 5–10 days period. Metoclopramide, a dopamine antagonist, should be avoided for the possible exacerbation of NMS symptoms.[2]

Conclusion/Key Points for Primary Care Physicians

NMS is a potentially fatal complication of neuroleptic therapy regardless of dosage or duration of therapy. An astute clinician should be aware of the fact that even a sub-therapeutic dose of a low-risk drug such as olanzapine even in a short duration of therapy can give rise to potential lethal complication. The triad of hyperthermia, dysautonomia, and rigidity can serve as a good clinical tool at the outset to consider differential diagnosis of NMS, which can be confirmed with a good drug and clinical history and CPK values.

Declaration of patient consent

The authors certify that they have obtained all appropriate patient consent forms. In the form patient has given his consent for her image and other clinical information to be reported in the journal. The patient understands that his name or initials will not be published and due efforts will be made to conceal his identity, but anonymity cannot be guaranteed.

Financial support and sponsorship

Nil.

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts of interest.
