pmc1 Introduction

An Orbital Apex Syndrome (OAS) has been described as a syndrome involving damage to the oculomotor nerve (III), trochlear nerve (IV), abducens nerve (VI) and Ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve (V1) associated with optic nerve dysfunction1.Visual loss and ophthalmoplegia are often the initial manifestation of an OAS [1]. It may be caused by infectious, inflammatory, neoplastic, iatrogenic and vascular process [2].

Central nervous system (CNS) Aspergillus infections are observed in approximately 10 % of immunocompromised patients. The mortality of this infection is >90 % [3]. Mucormycosis and Aspergillus species are the most common causes of such infection [4]. Infectious cases are most commonly due to orbital or post-septal cellulitis's secondary to sinusitis, either by contiguous or perivascular spread. The most common organism is Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., and Gram-negative organisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella spp., though fungal, viral, and parasitic infections have been documented [4]. OAS due to invasive fungal infection is uncommon and most often caused by Mucorales spp., or Aspergillus, particularly in those with immunocompromising conditions or uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. However, cases in immunocompetent individuals have been reported. In OAS due to Aspergillosis urgent treatment is necessary to avoid complications such as complete vision loss and cavernous sinus thrombosis. High index of suspicion is necessary to diagnose and prompt treatment in OAS due to aspergillosis [5].

Covid-19, a new infectious disease which spread to several other countries worldwide. It became pandemic. COVID-19 is primarily a disease with respiratory manifestation including cough, sore throat and anosmia, it mainly presents as a viral pneumonia.

More recently reports have emerged regarding complications like OAS leading onto life threatening cavernous sinus thrombosis and further sequels like sepsis and stroke [6].

OAS rarely occurred due to viral infections in the past. The current COVID-19 pandemic has brought in the entity, the pathophysiology of which needs to be explored further. We present case of OAS in patient recovered from COVID-19 infection. The case has been reported in accordance to the SCARE guideline [7].

2 Case report

A 43-year-old male with a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension who had recently recovered from a COVID-19 infection developed blurred vision on the left eye field, followed by impaired vision on left eye field for 2 months then retro-orbital pain for a further 3 months. The blurring of vision and headache developed soon after recovering from COVID-19 and was progressive in left eye field. He denied any symptoms of diplopia, scalp tenderness, weight loss, or jaw claudication. The patient was treated with IV methylprednisolone for 3 days with as diagnosis of optic neuritis, followed by a course of oral corticosteroid therapy (prednisolone, starting at 60 mg for 2 days and then tapered for 1 month), which produced transient relief of symptoms that recurred when prednisone was discontinued. Then repeat MRI was perform with no evidence of lesion he was treated again in a line of optic neuritis and symptoms relief transiently.

On examination, the patient demonstrated a visual acuity of 6/36 in the left and 6/6 in the right, while the eyes appeared normal externally. The ocular motility showed impaired abduction and upward movement in the left eye. Humphrey Visual Field (Swedish Interactive Threshold Algorithm) testing showed impaired vision in the left eye. There was RAPD (Relative Afferent Pupillary Defect) in the left eye and evidence of a brisk reflex in the right eye. There was a blurred disc margin in the left eye; however, the retina was flat in both eyes.

Laboratory testing revealed a hematocrit value of 42 %, a white blood cell count of 14,500/uL with a deferential of 95 % neutrophils and 5 % lymphocytes, and an erythrocytes sedimentation rate of 31 mm/h. Review of a previous MRI of the brain and orbits performed 5 months prior, implied optic neuritis; a mild T2W hyper-intense signal foci in the left optic nerve in the distal retrobulbar and intra-canalicular segment and post-contrast mild enhancement were noted in the same segment, suggesting inflammatory changes (Fig. 2A, B, C).

The patient was treated with IV methylprednisolone for 3 days, improving markedly over 1 month to a visual acuity of 20/30 OD. One month prior the pain and vision impairment recurred and the patient no longer perceived light on OD. Another course of prednisolone was initiated. An orbital MRI was performed on two days later, displaying a heterogeneously enhancing intermediate signal intensity lesion in the left orbital apex. The lesion was encasing and compressing the left optic nerve, without abnormal signal intensity or contrast enhancement within the left optic nerve either proximal or distal to the lesion. The lesion was contiguous with focal asymmetric enhancement in the left cavernous sinus. No inflammatory changes were seen in the orbital fat. A paranasal CT scan performed, demonstrated a heterogeneously enhancing, irregular soft tissue in the orbital apex with the widening of the canal and mild extension into the sphenoid sinus (Fig. 1). These features were likely infective pathology, with a differential diagnosis of Tolosa Hunt Syndrome. The patient was then prepared for an excision biopsy of the left orbital apex lesion, which was subsequently performed using the left extended lateral supraorbital approach.Fig. 1 CT head and paranasasinuses.

A heterogeneously enhancing, irregular soft tissue in the orbital apex with the widening of the canal and mild extension into the sphenoid sinus.

Fig. 1

Fig. 2 (A, B, C) MRI – T1, T2 and post gadolinium.

A heterogeneously enhancing intermediate signal intensity lesion in the left orbital apex. The lesion was encasing and compressing the left optic nerve, without abnormal signal intensity or contrast enhancement within the left optic nerve either proximal or distal to the lesion. The lesion was contiguous with focal asymmetric enhancement in the left cavernous sinus.

Fig. 2

Fig. 3 (a, b) A histopathological examination including PAS (Periodic acid-Schiff) stain for fungus showed acute angle, dichotomous branching, and septate fungal hyphae, morphological features compatible with aspergillosis.

Fig. 3

A yellowish-white tissue emitting purulent discharge was observed surrounding the left optic nerve by the orbital apex.

A histopathological examination including PAS (Periodic acid-Schiff) stain for fungus showed acute angle, dichotomous branching, and septate fungal hyphae, morphological features compatible with aspergillosis (Fig. 3.a, b).

3 Discussion

Due to anatomical proximity, two other syndromes with overlapping features included superior orbital fissure syndrome and cavernous sinus syndrome [6]. In the case of invasive Aspergillus infection, first infection from the paranasal sinuses will cause erosion of nearby bone or soft tissue which can latter lead to cavernous thrombus, embolism [6].

Bagheri et al. reported on a 37-year-old male with OAS who had no underlying systemic disease. They hypothesized that upper respiratory congestions in the setting of COVID-19 had contributed to compromised mucociliary clearance, secondary sinus obstruction, immunodeficiency due to disease and resultant bacterial orbital super-infection lead to OAS, in the background of hypercoagulable state induced by the covid virus [6].

Fungal rhinosinusitis was more common in immunocompromised patients.

Although SARS-CoV-2 is associated with severe pneumonia and ARDS, COVID-19 is also associated with a wide variety of extra-pulmonary complications, making it a systemic disease A small portion of COVID-19 patients may experience fungal or bacterial co-infections, although these occur less frequently than for influenza patients. Superinfections following viral infections are well known in a patient needing treatments in intensive care unit (ICU). Multiple publications demonstrated use of high dose steroid improved survival in hospitalized patient with severe Covid-19 [8]. However, there are multiple studies published demonstrating corticosteroids as risk factor for COVID-19 associated fungal superinfection with Aspergillosis, mucormycotic etc. (pulmonary and extrapulmonary) [9].

4 Conclusion

OASs, represent a heterogenous group of disorders that results from a number of etiologies. OAS in a background of COVID-19 pandemic can be due to invasive Aspergillus infection as in our patient without any systemic illness and lead to miss diagnosis and delay in proper treatment. Hence high index of suspicion and prompt treatment can save from fatal outcome. Treatment is directed at the underlying cause and may require neurosurgical interventions.

Consent

A written and signed consent for publication has been received from the patient and his family.

Ethical approval

The case study was cleared by the institutional review committee of Annapurna Neurological Institute and Allied Sciences.

Funding

The case study was not funded by any institutes.

Author contribution

Manik Kumar Lama: Study design, writing original draft, conceptualization and review.

Samir Acharya: Study design and analysis.

Pritam Gurung: Data analysis and writing.

Kamana Sharma: Imaging and HPE.

Rajeev Kumar Pandit: review and editing.

Basant Pant: Supervision.

Guarantor

Samir Acharya.

Basant Pant.

Research registration number

Not applicable.

Declaration of competing interest

None of the authors have potential conflicts of interest to be disclosed.

Acknowledgement

The authors are also greatly indebted to Miss. Victoria Bennington from California Pacific Medical Centre, San Francisco, USA for her proofreading, which has profoundly improved this paper.
