pmcIntroduction

Amebic enteritis is caused by the protozoan Entamoeba histolytica (1). Although most cases of E. histolytica infection are asymptomatic, clinical manifestations include amebic enteritis and extraintestinal disease (2). The rates of amebic infection are high in South America and Africa, but have also been increasing in developed countries (3) In developed countries, amebic infection is generally seen in individuals who have visited endemic areas or have contracted the infection via sexual transmission (4). Worldwide, approximately 50 million people develop E. histolytica infection manifesting as colitis or extraintestinal disease, with over 100,000 deaths annually (2,3).

Fulminant amebic enteritis is a rare condition, comprising only 0.5% of amebic enteritis cases (3). Fulminant amebic enteritis is defined as rapid progression to extensive full-layer necrosis of the colon, resulting in intestinal perforation, megacolon, and multiple organ failure, with a very high mortality rate of 60-80% (5). Although pregnancy is known to be one of the risk factors for fulminant amebic enteritis, there are few reported cases of fulminant amebic enteritis during pregnancy (6-11).

Herein, we report the case of a woman who developed and survived fulminant amebic enteritis in the perinatal period.

Case Report

The patient was a 27-year-old pregnant Japanese woman. She had traveled to Southeast Asia for business 1 year before becoming pregnant and had no history of immunodeficiency caused by conditions such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or drug administration. She developed diarrhea without abdominal pain in the 20th week of gestation. At 27 weeks of gestation, her abdominal symptoms rapidly worsened to include abdominal pain, watery diarrhea more than 10 times per day, and mucous bloody stools. She was rushed to a neighboring hospital and was admitted to the emergency department with a diagnosis of severe acute enteritis. The next day, she unexpectedly experienced spontaneous preterm birth, and, despite substantial efforts, the newborn died because of umbilical cord strangulation. The patient's anemia and hypoalbuminemia progressed rapidly. Sigmoidoscopy revealed the affected colorectum had reddish edematous mucosa with adherent mucopurulent exudate (Fig. 1A, B). Bacterial culture and testing for Clostridioides difficile toxin in the patient's stool were negative. Although the biopsy results were not yet available, her physicians suspected severe ulcerative colitis (UC) and planned to start her on high-dose intravenous corticosteroid therapy. However, because of unexplained deterioration of consciousness and signs of peritoneal irritation, her physician declined to administer corticosteroids, and she was transferred to our tertiary referral hospital for intensive care and treatment of colitis.

Figure 1. Endoscopic findings by a previous physician. Sigmoidoscopy shows that the affected colorectum has reddish edematous mucosa with adherent mucopurulent exudate. The previous physician suspected severe ulcerative colitis on the basis of this finding.

On arrival at our hospital, the patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of E3V4M6, temperature of 37.3°C, blood pressure of 150/100 mmHg, pulse rate of 122 beats/min, respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min, percutaneous oxygen saturation of 92% (room air), and a distended abdomen with signs of peritoneal irritation. A peripheral blood examination showed anemia (Hb 10.4 g/dL), thrombocytopenia (136,000 platelets/mm3), prolonged coagulation (prothrombin time-international normalized ratio 1.23), an elevated inflammatory response (C-reactive protein concentration 21.1 mg/dL), and hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin concentration 1.2 g/dL) (Table). Computed tomography showed edematous changes in the colorectum, loss of haustra, and a large amount of residue filling in the lumen (Fig. 2). There were no findings suggestive of megacolon or gastrointestinal perforation. Stool cultures were repeated but remained negative. The cytomegalovirus (CMV) antigenemia test was also negative.

Table. Laboratory Data on Arrival at Our Hospital.

	Measured values	Normal range (woman)	
Blood analysis			
WBC (/mm3)	7,010	3,300-8,600	
Neut (%)	85.4	38.5-80.5	
Lymp (%)	13.1	16.5-49.5	
RBC (×104/mm3)	338	386-492	
Hb (g/dL)	10.4	11.6-14.8	
Hct (%)	30.3	35.1-44.4	
Plt (×104/mm3)	13.6	15.8-34.8	
APTT (s)	39.8	24.5-38.7	
PT (s)	15.1	9.3-12.3	
PT-INR	1.23	0.90-1.10	
FBG (mg/dL)	396	184-378	
FDP (μg/mL)	51.2	<5.0	
TP (g/dL)	3.4	6.6-8.1	
Alb (g/dL)	1.2	4.1-5.1	
AST (U/L)	26	13-30	
ALT (U/L)	6	7-23	
LDH (U/L)	459	124-222	
ChE (U/L)	40	201-421	
T-bil (mg/dL)	0.8	0.4-1.5	
Cr (mg/dL)	0.43	0.46-0.79	
BUN (mg/dL)	11	8-20	
Glucose (mg/dL)	135	73-109	
Na (mmol/L)	132	138-145	
K (mmol/L)	3.8	3.6-4.8	
Ca (mg/dL)	6.7	8.8-10.1	
CRP (mg/dL)	21.1	0.000-0.140	
Ferritin (ng/mL)	2,813	5.0-179.0	
Procalcitonin (ng/mL)	2.91	<0.50	
Cytomegalovirus pp65 antigen (C10, C11)	Negative	Negative	
Arterial blood gas analysis (on room air)			
pH	7.437	7.350-7.450	
pCO2 (mmHg)	26.7	35-45	
pO2 (mmHg)	92.3	75-100	
Bicarbonate (mmol/L)	17.7	20.0-26.0	
Actual base excess (mmol/L)	-5.0	-2.0-2.0	
Lactate (mmol/L)	1.5	0.5-1.6	
PT: prothrombin time, APTT: activated partial thromboplastin time, FBG: fibrinogen quantity, FDP: fibrin degradation products, CRP: C-reactive protein

Figure 2. Computed tomography image of the colon. There are edematous changes in the colorectum (arrows), loss of haustra, and a large amount of residue filling in the lumen. There is no irregularity of the mucosal surface due to ulceration or perivascularization of the colon, which is seen in patients with severe ulcerative colitis.

The patient was managed in the intensive care unit (ICU) of our hospital because of her poor general condition (Fig. 3). Sigmoidoscopy performed at our hospital revealed a large amount of squalid ochre-colored pseudomembrane with blood (Fig. 4A, B). Removal of the pseudomembrane revealed edematous, faded reddish-purple mucosa; however, there was no granularity of the mucosa or small yellowish spots, which are typical findings of UC (Fig. 4C, D). Several biopsies ware taken from both the colorectal mucosa and the pseudomembrane. On the basis of the findings of the pseudomembrane, we suspected some type of parasitic infection and requested emergency periodic acid-Schiff staining. On the next day, numerous E. histolytica trophozoites in the pseudomembrane were observed (Fig. 5). The pathological findings of the previous physician were then confirmed, and similar to our findings, E. histolytica trophozoites were identified in the exudation.

Figure 3. Treatment course chart. The patient’s general condition recovered after metronidazole, but she developed CMV enteritis and was treated with ganciclovir. Subtotal colectomy was then performed owing to intestinal stenosis.

Figure 4. Endoscopic findings in the rectum (A) and sigmoid colon (B) on admission. Sigmoidoscopy reveals a large amount of squalid ochre-colored pseudomembrane with blood. (C, D) Endoscopic observation of the colonic mucosa after removal of the pseudomembrane reveals edematous, faded reddish-purple mucosa (arrows), but no granularity of the mucosa or small yellowish spots, which are typical findings of ulcerative colitis.

Figure 5. Histopathology of biopsies of the inflamed mucosa and pseudomembrane of the sigmoid colon. (A)Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining, ×10. (B) Periodic acid-Schiff staining, ×10. (C) H&E staining, ×40. (D) Periodic acid-Schiff staining, ×40. Periodic acid-Schiff staining reveals numerous Entamoeba histolytica trophozoites in the pseudomembrane.

The patient's general condition worsened, and she required ventilator management for pulmonary edema. Based on the clinical course, she was diagnosed with fulminant amebic enteritis and intravenous metronidazole administration was promptly initiated. After metronidazole administration, her inflammatory markers improved, the diarrhea and fever disappeared within a few days, and she was successfully weaned off the ventilator. However, despite the continuation of the metronidazole, the diarrhea and fever recurred on day 20 of hospitalization, causing prolonged malnutrition. Repeat stool cultures were negative. Colonoscopy showed that the pseudomembrane had disappeared and multiple punched-out ulcers had newly emerged (Fig. 6). Pathological examination of biopsy specimens revealed no trophoblasts and no intranuclear or intracellular inclusion bodies. A repeat CMV antigenemia test was positive (C10-/C11-positive cell ratio: 4/9). Therefore, the patient was suspected to have CMV enteritis and was administered intravenous ganciclovir, which markedly improved her symptoms and laboratory data. However, on day 60 of hospitalization, the patient developed abdominal distension, and colonoscopy and Gastrografin enema (diatrizoate acid; Bracco Diagnostics, Princeton, USA) revealed severe stenosis from the rectum to the transverse colon after the ulcers had healed (Fig. 7). She was able to receive liquid nutritional supplements but had difficulty ingesting meals because of obstructive symptoms.

Figure 6. Endoscopic findings in the rectum (A) and sigmoid colon (B). Colonoscopy performed after metronidazole administration shows that the pseudomembrane has disappeared and there are multiple newly emerged punched-out ulcers.

Figure 7. Gastrografin enema (diatrizoate acid; Bracco Diagnostics, Princeton, USA) shows severe stenosis from the rectum to the descending colon after the punched-out ulcers healed (arrows).

Subtotal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis were performed to improve the obstruction. We considered preserving the right colon but instead opted for subtotal colonic resection to avoid extensive dissection and reversal of the colon. The operative specimen showed wall thickening with inflammation from the rectum to the transverse colon and stenosis of the rectosigmoid junction (Fig. 8). Pathological examination showed active inflammation and fibrosis, and fibrotic stenosis was diagnosed. No E. histolytica trophozoites or intranuclear inclusion bodies were observed. Her postoperative course was good, and her general condition improved. She was discharged approximately 200 days after her initial hospitalization.

Figure 8. The resected colon. Ulcers were scarred and there was stenosis mainly in the left colon. The mucosa was atrophic in the entire colon.

Discussion

We experienced a case in which a pregnant woman developed fulminant amebic enteritis with subsequent CMV enteritis, which was successfully treated with metronidazole and ganciclovir, saving her life. This important case shows that pregnancy is a risk factor for fulminant amebic enteritis, and subsequent CMV enteritis can occur during intensive care even in non-immunosuppressed patients.

Amebic enteritis caused by E. histolytica may be effectively treated with intravenous metronidazole before the infection becomes fulminant. However, fulminant amebic enteritis has a poor prognosis and often requires extensive enterectomy (5,12). In patients with non-fulminant amebic enteritis initially misdiagnosed as acute colitis and treated with corticosteroids, the disease often progresses rapidly after corticosteroid treatment, leading to a mortality rate of 25% (13). If the present patient had been misdiagnosed as having UC and corticosteroids had been administered, it is extremely likely that she would have died because of her poor general condition at the time of transfer to our hospital. Therefore, it is clinically very important to accurately diagnose amebic enteritis and to consider amebic enteritis as a differential diagnosis for refractory diarrhea.

The diagnosis of amebic enteritis requires proof of the presence of E. histolytica. Repeat fecal examinations are useful, but endoscopic biopsy has higher diagnostic value. The typical endoscopic findings of amebic enteritis are discrete bump-like elevations with erosions covered by dirty exudate with bleeding, and circular ulcers (14-16). However, these typical endoscopic findings are not always present, making the condition difficult to diagnose; a previous case report of fulminant amebic enteritis described colonic lesions presenting as widespread ulceration and adherence of dirty mucinous exudates mimicking pseudomembrane (17). The important endoscopic findings of amebic enteritis are a sanguineous exudate or a yellow pseudomembrane composed of fibrin and necrotic debris. Therefore, clinicians should biopsy not only the colonic mucosa but also the intestinal exudates. Indeed, in this case, performing emergency periodic acid-Schiff staining on the basis of colonoscopic findings of the pseudomembrane was considered to be a decisive factor in the early diagnosis and medical treatment, and saving the patient's life.

In the present case, CMV enteritis was suspected to have developed as a complication during the treatment of amebic enteritis. Although there are no reported cases of concurrent amebic enteritis and CMV enteritis during pregnancy, it has been reported that 32% of HIV-infected patients with CMV enteritis also have amebic colitis (18). Although CMV exists in more than half of the healthy adult population, it is usually a latent infection and manifests only in immunocompromised patients (19). However, recent studies have demonstrated active CMV infection due to compensated anti-inflammatory response syndrome in non-immunosuppressed ICU patients (20). Severe infections, such as sepsis, have been reported to cause uncontrolled inflammation, resulting in immunosuppression (21). Uncontrolled inflammation also occurred in our case, and a similar mechanism may have developed. In addition, CMV infection can be caused by blood transfusions, which are commonly performed during intensive care (22). A red blood cell transfusion had been performed before the presumed onset of CMV infection in this case. Our patient might have developed CMV enteritis via the anti-inflammatory response syndrome mechanism and blood transfusion, which eventually led to stenosis requiring surgical treatment. This suggests that patients with severe enteritis who require ICU admission may require frequent CMV monitoring, even those without immunosuppressive therapy or underlying disease.

To our knowledge, only six articles have reported perinatal amebic enteritis, including 13 cases of fulminant amebic enteritis (6-11). These previous cases are similar to our case in that most patients were approximately 30 years of age and had no underlying condition such as immunodeficiency, and only 3 of 13 (23%) patients survived. Surgery was performed in 6 of the 13 patients for megacolon or intestinal necrosis in the acute phase of the disease, approximately 1 week after the onset of enteritis, and 3 patients were saved and 3 died. (9,11), All seven patients in whom surgery was not performed were reported to have died. There have been no reports to date in which a patient survived the acute phase of fulminant amoebic enteritis by medical therapy as in the present case. Although our patient eventually required surgery owing to intestinal stenosis, the fact that she was able to safely undergo surgery after her general condition had improved because of prompt initial treatment is a novel finding that distinguishes this case from previous reports.

Pregnancy has been reported as a risk factor for fulminant amebic enteritis, but there are various hypotheses regarding the mechanism. In general, immunologic alterations during pregnancy may impair pathogen clearance, making pregnant women more susceptible to initial amebic infection than non-pregnant women. Increasing estrogen and progesterone concentrations during pregnancy lead to a decreasing robustness of cell-mediated immunity (23). Other possible causes include the physiologic changes that occur in pregnancy. For example, pregnancy-related changes such as elevated cholesterol (which is involved in amebic growth), elevated corticosteroids, decreased lung capacity, and changes in blood flow may cause severe disease (7). In addition to these mechanisms, the special condition of pregnancy may complicate early diagnosis and treatment. Furthermore, the fact that metronidazole is contraindicated in the first trimester may contribute to the progression of amebic infection to fulminant disease in pregnancy.

The present report has several limitations. The first is the lack of proof of immunological changes in pregnancy, despite the rapid progression of disease during the pregnancy course. The second is the lack of polymerase chain reaction testing for CMV. Further analyses and case accumulation are needed.

We report a patient who developed and survived fulminant amebic enteritis in the perinatal period. Amebic enteritis is thought to be most prevalent in developing countries, so the diagnosis is especially difficult in a non-endemic area. As pregnancy is a risk factor for fulminant amebic enteritis, even in non-immunosuppressed patients, amebic enteritis must be considered as a differential diagnosis for women with refractory bloody diarrhea in the perinatal period.

The authors state that they have no Conflict of Interest (COI).

Acknowledgement

We thank Kelly Zammit, BVSc, for editing a draft of this manuscript.
