Introduction
Extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal (ECCO2R) is a partial form of extracorporeal lung assist (ECLA), which can be used in the management of refractory hypercapnic respiratory failure.[1] It is a valid alternative to consider in hypercapnic respiratory failure in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients to avoid invasive ventilation when noninvasive ventilation fails.[2]

Here we report a similar case, after obtaining informed consent, where a patient suffering from severe hypercapnic respiratory failure due to COPD, was selected for ECCO2R and improved remarkably.

Case Report
We present a case report of a 73-year-old male (91.5 kg, height - 184 cm) referred to our hospital with acute on chronic COPD exacerbation and Type 2 respiratory failure not responding to conventional nonivasive ventilation. Later patient developed multiple organ dysfunction syndrome with Type 2 respiratory failure with mixed acidosis.

His presenting blood gases showed profound acidemia. pH - 7.057, base excess - 7.5, PCO2-11.23 kPa, PaO2-13.7 kPa on FiO2-50%. P: F ratio was around 200. His inflammatory markers were high (total leukocyte count [TLC] 26 × 109/L, procalcitonin 11.2 mcg/L, C-reactive protein [CRP] 104 mg/L) and renal functions worsened and he was oliguric.

He was started on appropriate antibiotics and noninvasive ventilation. He was started on noradrenaline infusion to target mean arterial pressure of 70 mm Hg. Continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration instituted to manage his renal failure with an aim for a negative fluid balance of 1.5 L. Hemodynamic monitoring was done by pulse-induced contour cardiac output.

After 12 h, he continued to be acidotic profoundly because of raised PaCO2-10.86 kPa. Failure to remove CO2 was noted despite being on non-invasive ventilation. His chest was clear B/L on auscultation. His vasopressors requirements increased as he continued to be acidotic due to high PaCO2 levels.

Extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal veno-venous (Hemo Lung Respiratory Assist System: Alung Technologies Inc.) was instituted at that time to normalize his acid-base imbalance, which was due to increased PaCO2.

He was started on pump flow - 0.56 L/min, sweep flow - 10 L/min, sweep FiO2-1.0, CO2 removal at 6-10 L of sweep flow, which removed CO2 about 75-100 ml/min. His activated partial thromboplastin time ratio was targeted around 1.2-1.6. Platelets, fibrinogen, and Hb monitored periodically to recognize any signs of bleed/disseminated intravascular coagulation.

Sweep flows were adjusted according to blood gas CO2 values. Heparin infusions were initially avoided as he was coagulopathic, but added later during weaning phase.

It was noted that after starting him on ECCO2R, pH improved to 7.30 as PaCO2 normalized to around 6.5 kPa.

He was continued on non-invasive ventilation on bi-level positive airway pressure MODE with aim Sats >90%, pH >7.3, R/R <30. His inflammatory markers improved. TLC was 16 × 109/L, CRP 46 mg/L, procalcitonin was 0.9 mcg/L enteral nutrition was continued throughout.

Extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal and adjusting sweep flows and actually to be able to monitor CO2 levels removed per minute helped to adjust his ventilator settings accordingly.

Continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration was turned off as renal function recovered.

Unfortunately patient had sepsis relapse. He turned acidotic and work of breathing worsened. Sweep flows on veno-venous CO2 removal were again adjusted as per demand. This helped to manage the patient without increasing any support on conventional ventilation and hence no increased sedation/paralyzing agents were required.

Extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal was turned off after 20 days when his infection was treated adequately.

Sweep flows were gradually taken down to minimal levels to provide minimal CO2 removal. A decrease in every liter of gas flow was made only after when a patient had been stable on it for 6-10 h. A sweep flow of 4 L/min accounted for 80 ml/min as opposed to about 45 ml/min when on 1 L/min.

He developed critical illness related weakness and had a prolonged weaning and rehabilitation by extensive physiotherapy, after which he was successfully decannulated and discharged from the intensive care unit.

Discussion
The rationale behind ECLA is compelling, that is to replace or support the function of failing lung to adequately exchange gases. ECLA can be full or partial.[1] Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), which both oxygenates and removes carbon dioxide from the blood is full support. Partial support is ECCO2R which removes only carbon dioxide. ECCO2R, like ECMO, is associated with complications like hemolysis, activation of coagulation and inflammatory cascade hence before initiating lung support favorable risk benefit ratio should be confirmed. ECCO2R is not a cure but a support which gives time to native lung to recover their function. Candidates chosen should have a realistic chance of recovery of lung function or transplantation and usually do not respond effectively to conventional lung protective ventilation strategies. ECCO2R is beneficial in hypercapnic respiratory failure because it reduces respiratory acidosis, ensures effective lung protective ventilation or weaning and might even prevent the need for intubation.[2] We feel this aspect of ECCO2R, where it can obviate the need of mechanical ventilation in COPD patients, not responding to non-invasive ventilation, as manifested by persistently high PCO2 and respiratory acidosis, may establish ECCO2R as a widely used alternative, especially when new technological advancements are making extracorpeal devices less traumatic, more physiological and cost effective. ECCO2R can be veno-venous with a driving pump or pumpless arteriovenous design. Pumpless ECCO2R has many obvious advantages over ECMO like low need for heparin (can be avoided in patients with bleeding disorder), simpler set up, low costs, less maintenance, reduced level of inflammation and hemolysis and less vascular complications due to thinner 15.5 fr bore canulas used, although survival benefit has not been confirmed due to lack of studies in this area.[34] Hence in conclusion we emphasize the potential role of ECCO2R in preventing invasive ventilation in cases where conventional non-invasive ventilation singly fails to treat refractory hypercapnia.

Source of Support: Nil

Conflict of Interest: None declared.
