Introduction
Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB) is one the most popular restrictive
bariatric procedures. It is fairly uncomplicated, fast and – what is most
important for patients – reversible. Its long-term effects, however, are broadly
discussed among bariatric surgeons. Some authors, such as O’Brien et
al., state that this method is highly successful [1], whereas others question its long-term effects [2, 3]. Despite this discussion, approximately 23% of patients require band
removal due to various complications [4,
5]. In 1.2% of cases, band
infection is the reason [6]. It may be caused
by surgical technique, implantation of a foreign body or frequent band adjustments
requiring saline injections to the subcutaneous port. The pathogens are mainly
Escherichia coli or staphylococci. A few authors have reported
several cases of mycobacterial infections after gastric banding, mainly by common
pathogens or water contaminants. Yet we did not find a single report describing primary
abdominal tuberculosis associated with LAGB [7–9]. Some of the symptoms
presented by our patient may have suggested the correct diagnosis. Rapid formation of
peritoneal adhesions with elevated levels of CA-125 may suggest ovarian cancer, but are
also frequent in peritoneal tuberculosis (TB) [10, 11]. Ascites culture is
mentioned as a gold standard, yet based on our case and the literature it has positive
results in only 20% of cases and takes several weeks to achieve [12]. The Ziehl-Neelsen stain result is positive
in only 6% of cases. Although abdominal TB is the most common sign of
extra-pulmonary infection, a chest radiograph reveals signs of TB in only 33% of
cases. In our case the diagnosis was far more difficult because of the negative genetic
test of ascites and positive only from the omental specimen.

Case report
A 25-year-old woman with obesity (body mass index (BMI) 40.1 kg/m2, 158
cm, 100 kg) with a history of polycystic ovary syndrome, iodine allergy and gastritis
was admitted in 2005 to receive the LAGB procedure. The band was placed
laparoscopically via the pars flaccida technique. With an uneventful
post-operative course the patient was discharged on the third day. After several
months and numerous adjustments of the band the patient’s weight dropped to
only 95 kg. The patient reported occasional malaise, feverishness, and recurrent
upper respiratory tract infections. In 2008 she was readmitted to the surgery
department because of fever and signs of port site infection. The port was therefore
removed and the patient was discharged after a day. Occasional malaise and
feverishness appeared after a few months with unknown origin. In October 2010 a
gastroscopy did not reveal signs of a functioning band or its erosion. In January
2011 the patient was readmitted to another surgical department with a suspicion that
the band infection may be the cause of the patient’s recurring symptoms. A
laparoscopy with conversion to laparotomy was performed and the band was removed.
Bacterial culture revealed an E. coli band infection and proper
targeted antibiotics were administered. During the postoperative follow-up minimal
surgical wound infection was reported. On the 8th day the patient was
discharged. After 2 weeks the patient returned with hectic fever, elevated levels of
white blood cell counts (WBC) and C-reactive protein (CRP). An abdominal computed
tomography (CT) scan revealed peritoneal adhesions, abdominal and mediastinal
lymphadenopathy, and left pleural effusion. Despite the broad-spectrum antibiotics
(cilastatin and linezolid) administered, the patient’s condition did not
improve. A chest CT scan showed increased parenchymal density which may have
suggested pneumonia. Therefore the patient was referred to the pulmonology department
for further investigation. Elevated levels of Ca-125 antigen, CRP, WBC,
γ-glutamyltransferase (GGTP), D-dimer, procalcitonin, hypoalbuminemia and IgA
deficiency were found. Bone marrow biopsy revealed only reactive changes due to
infection. No parasite infection was confirmed. Broad-spectrum antibiotics and
antifungal agents were continued without improvement. Due to IgA deficiency
immunoglobulin therapy was administered. The patient was prepared for surgery because
of sudden abdominal pain and signs of septic shock. Urgent laparotomy revealed
massive peritoneal adhesions with moderate ascites, swabbed for culture. The parietal
and visceral peritoneum along with the greater omentum was covered in small nodules.
Liver, omental and peritoneal surgical biopsy was performed, suspecting malignant
neoplasm. A histopathological examination of the specimen ruled out cancer or
lymphoma, yet revealed chronic granulomatous inflammation. Ziehl-Neelsen stain was
negative. After the surgery the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit.
Bronchial lavage and peritoneal effusion were tested for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis DNA and it came out negative. Suspecting atypical
mycobacteriosis (yet with negative peritoneal effusion culture), ethambutol,
clarithromycin and amikacin were introduced along with antifungal (posaconazole) and
antiparasitic agents. Due to severe malnutrition, total parenteral nutrition was
introduced. The patient’s status stabilized along with CRP and WBC levels.
Persisting fever was lowered after administering corticosteroids. Enteral nutrition
was introduced with a good effect, allowing the patient’s discharge. The
postoperative specimen (omentum fragment) was tested further genetically, revealing
M. tuberculosis DNA. Corticosteroids were immediately
discontinued, and isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and streptomycin were
administered for 4 months. After completion of the therapy an abdominal CT scan did
not show any pathological findings. The fever and malaise withdrew. Nowadays the
patient does not present any symptoms.

Conclusions
Abdominal tubercular infection and sepsis following a surgical procedure is extremely
rare. There are no reported cases of tuberculous peritonitis after a bariatric
procedure. By presenting this case we want to share the diagnostic difficulties
regarding the patient. We would also like to underline that a granulomatous peritonitis
with fast forming adhesions and ascites, elevated serum Ca-125 level and
immunodeficiency should always arouse suspicion of M. tuberculosis. It
is crucial especially in regions where major population migration occurs.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
