INTRODUCTION
Scabies is a parasitic disease caused by Sarcoptes scabiei variant
hominis. The main form of transmission is personal contact.
Less often, transmission through indirect contact occurs through fomites, such as
clothing and sheets.1

Worldwide prevalence is estimated is 300 million cases per year. The disease can
occur in any geographical area, age, race or social group. Precarious hygiene
conditions and crowded places are important risk factors.2,3

Differential diagnoses are, among others, seborrheic dermatitis, atopic dermatitis,
ichthyosis and psoriatic erythroderma.1

Crusted scabies, or Norwegian scabies, is a rare and highly contagious form of
scabies, characterized by the presence of numerous parasites in the horny layer of
the skin. In most cases, it is associated with an underlying disease and mainly
affects immunocompromised individuals due to conditions such as lymphoma, acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome, immunosuppressive and corticosteroid treatment,
malnutrition, institutionalization and mental illness.3,4 It presents
as thick, scaling, hyperkeratotic lesions, affecting the whole body, mainly the
face, neck, scalp and subungual region.5 Affected individuals harbor thousands of parasites, thus the
disease is highly contagious.6 It
is associated with increased morbidity and mortality due to the frequent occurrence
of secondary infection and evolution to sepsis.2

CASE REPORT
A previously healthy four-month-old mulatto boy, was admitted to our service with a
history of lesions miliaria rubra-like on the neck and folds of the upper and lower
limbs that had been present for two months. At that time, he was referred to a
pediatrician, who prescribed a powder formulation with bismuth subgallate and zinc
oxide, associated with a cream with ketoconazole, betamethasone dipropionate and
neomycin sulfate, applied for one month throughout the body. After this period,
since there was no improvement in the condition, prednisolone (0.8mg/kg/day for
seven days, orally) was prescribed in association to potassium permanganate in
topical solution. Due to the refractoriness of the condition, the pediatrician
prescribed a single-dose ampoule of betamethasone, intramuscularly. Since then the
lesions have spread to the trunk, face and scalp, and have become crusty. The child
was finally referred to the dermatology clinic with the diagnosis of "severe
seborrheic dermatitis".

The mother, a 16-year-old teenager, was followed throughout pregnancy and presented
all negative serological tests (VDRL, hepatitis B, toxoplasmosis and HIV). She
denied any type of intercurrence except the need for topical treatment for scabies
during pregnancy. She also said that the child was born healthy.

At physical examination, the patient presented multiple erythematous papules and
crusted and erythematous lesions disseminated in the body, mainly affecting the
trunk and the scalp. Important nail dystrophy and fissures in the abdomen were
evident. He was hypoactive, tachycardic, febrile, with cushingoid facies and
anasarca. In face of this situation, our main diagnostic hypothesis was crusted or
Norwegian scabies, associated with secondary infection and sepsis (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1 Erythema and widespread hyperkeratotic plaque



Figure 2 Significant involvement of the scalp and clefts in the trunk



The mother and the grandparents complained of important pruritus, especially
nocturnal. At physical examination, they presented erythematous and hyperchromic
papules disseminated mainly in the abdomen and back, compatible with scabies (Figure 3).

Figure 3 Mother presenting brownish erythematous papules and excoriations



Dermoscopy several parasites, represented by triangular (delta-shaped) structures or
similar to millipedes (Figures 4 and 5). Skin biopsy was then conducted, laboratory
tests were requested, and the infant was hospitalized in a pediatric hospital.

Figure 4 Dermoscopy of the child’s inflammatory lesion: triangular structures
(delta-shaped), which represent the parasite’s head and front paws
(×10)



Figure 5 Dermoscopy of the child’s lesion: structures similar to millipedes,
compatible with the tunnels excavated by the parasite (×10)



Histopathology revealed tunnels in the horny layer with the presence of the parasite
(Figure 6). Laboratory tests revealed
significant leukocytosis with left shift, thrombocytopenia, and increased levels of
inflammatory markers.

Figure 6 Histopathology: Psoriasiform acanthosis with tunnels in the stratum
corneum and presence of the parasite and its waste (×40)



Intravenous antibiotic therapy, topical application of permethrin lotion 1% once
daily and contact isolation was then established. Family members were treated with
oral ivermectin and topical permethrin lotion 5%. On the tenth day of
hospitalization, the patient presented improvement of cutaneous lesions, but the
condition evolved with septic shock and, despite the treatment instituted in the
intensive care unit, there was cardiac arrest and death.

DISCUSSION
We describe a case of dramatic evolution of crusted scabies. The diagnosis of scabies
at the onset of the disease is essential so that there is no evolution to the
crusted form, especially in immunosuppressed patients. This diagnosis is often
neglected by non-specialists, mainly in children, because of its variable clinical
presentation. It is also important to look at family history and to research the
symptomatology in close relatives - which, in this case, would have helped a lot in
the initial elucidation, since the mother, had already been treated for scabies
during pregnancy, and showed signs and symptoms of active disease. Unfortunately,
the child was not treated correctly initially, and the use of high-potency topical
corticosteroids over a long period of time on a large extent of the skin, associated
with the use of high-dose oral and intramuscular corticosteroids, led to
immunosuppression, which facilitated the secondary infection and sepsis.

Conflict of interest: None

* Study conducted at General Polyclinic of Rio de Janeiro and at Jesus Municipal
Hospital- Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.

Financial support: none.
