Case report
A 22-year-old woman was referred by the critical care team of a district general
hospital (DGH) to our regional burns unit with 100% TBSA involvement following toxic
epidermal necrolysis (TEN) on the background of GPA. The patient initially presented
to the DGH with a fever, shortness of breath and feeling generally unwell. A chest
X-ray demonstrated multiple opacities and on computerised tomography (CT) of the
chest and abdomen, she was found to have multiple cavitations, a pulmonary embolism
and a femoral thrombosis. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) was confirmed and
the patient was commenced on warfarin, rituximab, methylprednisolone,
Immunoglobulins (IgG) and fluconazole, to which she responded well. As part of this
regime she had a second and third infusion of rituximab and prophylactic
co-trimoxazole.

Three days following co-trimoxazole, she presented back to the DGH with angioedema
and had developed a rash with an estimated 90% total body surface area (TBSA),
involving the oral and ophthalmic mucosa. Fluconazole and co-trimoxazole were
immediately stopped and the steroids increased with the initial suspicion of
Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS). The patient deteriorated, progressing to 100% TBSA,
and required significant support from the critical care team. TEN was suspected and
subsequently confirmed by skin biopsy. She had an initial SCORTEN (SCORe of Toxic
Epidermal Necrosis) score of 3, predicting a 35.3% mortality risk, and was
accordingly referred and transferred to our specialist burns centre for management
of her extensive wounds. Figure
1a and b show the
large extent of the TBSA involved in this patient.

Figure 1. (a) Anterior view of patient with 100% TBSA of toxic epidermal necrolysis,
including the head and neck. (b) Posterior view of the patient.

Piperacillin/Tazobactam (Tazocin) and Vancomycin antibiotics were commenced following
sputum and wound swab sensitivities. One week following admission, prednisolone was
reduced to 40 mg daily. After 10 days of treatment, there was good re-epithelisation
of the skin. The patient was discharged at 3 weeks following a period of
physiotherapy.

Discussion
GPA is a serious disease, with a fatal outcome in the absence of treatment.
Fortunately, with therapeutic approaches that are increasingly standardised and the
emergence of new biotherapies, 90% of patients go into remission, and the survival
rate is approximately 75–83% at 5 years. The current treatment is based on a first
phase, known as the induction phase, which aims to put the disease into remission,
and lasts about 3–6 months according to the clinical response. A second phase, known
as the maintenance phase, must then consolidate the remission and limit the risk of
relapse and generally lasts 12–24 months. The intensity of the initial therapeutic
approach must be adjusted for each patient and for the type and seriousness of GPA
in order to avoid two pitfalls: excessive treatment associated with a significant
risk of side effects, or insufficient treatment with a risk of failure or early
relapse. With induction treatment, it is recommended that GPA be treated with a
systemic corticosteroid and immunosuppressant combination. Oral prednisone is
recommended at a daily starting dose of 1 mg/kg. For severe or refractory forms,
oral corticosteroid therapy is preceded by an intravenous bolus of
methylprednisolone at a dosage of 7.5 mg to first flare up or relapse (results under
publication). Rituximab has a lower risk of relapse compared to azathioprine at 28
and 44 months after the start of the maintenance treatment (rate of major relapses
at 44 months: 18.2% in the rituximab arm vs. 51.9% in the azathioprine arm).
Treatment with co-trimoxazole (sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim at a dose of 400 mg/80
mg) per day is systematically given for the prevention of relapse and of
Pneumocystis jirovecii infections. The treatment regimens are
increasingly adapted to the expression of the disease and to its course; relapses
remain frequent, however, and the maintenance treatment methods warrant better standardization.1

Glucocorticosteroids are prescribed in conjunction with induction therapy
immunosuppressants and are not prescribed as monotherapy to induce clinical
remission in GPA. Corticosteroids are prescribed at high doses while the disease is
active then gradually tapered to the lowest dose of corticosteroid required to
maintain remission with concomitant immunosuppressive drugs.

Although guidelines have been proposed regarding the treatment of TEN,2,3 its rarity hinders the
establishment of treatment based on large prospective studies, and subsequently
management standards have not been widely accepted.4 It is, however, agreed that primary treatment consists of prompt withdrawal
of causative drugs5 and transfer to a regional burn unit. Transfer to a burn unit, no more than 7
days after onset of symptoms, has been acknowledged as reducing the risk of
infections, hospital length of stay and infection-related mortality.6–9

TEN management focuses on resuscitative, symptomatic and supportive strategies, and
comprises fluid resuscitation and electrolyte replacement, nutritional support, as
well as suitable and targeted wound care.7,10 With sepsis being recognised
as the leading cause of mortality in the TEN population,5,11 increased attentiveness
towards skin care is warranted and includes prevention, early detection and
treatment of infection10 achieved by frequent skin, blood and urine cultures.12 Emphasis must also be placed on the role of analgesia, deep vein
thrombosis/pulmonary embolism and erosive gastric ulcer prophylaxis, and regular physiotherapy.11

Due to the uncertainty surrounding TEN pathogenesis, several different modalities
have been proposed for the treatment of TEN, including high-dose intravenous
immunoglobulins, plasmapheresis, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine and systemic
steroids; however, these therapies are relatively ineffective.13,14 The use of
systemic corticosteroids for treatment of TEN has in particular been deemed
controversial due to associations with increased infections leading to greater
length of hospital stay and increased mortality.15-20 In a study by Halebian et al.,15 15 consecutive patients with TEN or SJS managed without corticosteroids after
transfer to the burn centre (group 2) were compared to a previous consecutive group
of 15 patients who received high doses of these drugs (group 1). Group 2 had a 66%
survival, which was a significant improvement compared to the 33% survival in group
1 (P = 0.057). In group 1, mortality was associated with loss of
more than 50% TBSA skin loss. In group 2, mortality was related to advanced age and
associated diseases. Non-steroid (group 2) management was associated with a
decreased incidence of ulceration of gastrointestinal columnar epithelium,
Candida sepsis, and an increased survival after septic
complications.

Conclusion
TEN with GPA are both life-threatening illnesses. Treatment for GPA is well
established and steroid use is part of this treatment in both the induction as well
as the maintenance phase stages. Robust evidence for or against the use of steroids
in the treatment of TEN is unavailable, but available published literature suggests
that they can be harmful. We present an exceptionally rare case where both of these
diseases occurred concurrently and raise awareness to the controversial role of
steroid use in TENs. We also emphasise the importance of a multidisciplinary team
approach for the management of such a complex case.

Declaration of conflicting interests: The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public,
commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Ethical approval: The authors confirm that the necessary written, informed consent was obtained
from patients for this article.
