Introduction
Descending necrotizing mediastinitis (DNM) is a rare and lethal mediastinitis, which can rapidly lead to sepsis.

DNM usually arises from oropharyngeal, cervical or odontogenic infections, due to the anatomical contiguity of the fascial planes between neck and mediastinum.

The symptomatology is initially mild and no specific. Therefore, the diagnosis of DNM is delayed and is generally made when the sepsis is already developed.

An early diagnostic computed tomographic (CT) scanning is mandatory for all cervical infections, including neck and chest examination, to confirm the DNM, to detect its complications and to establish an optimal management of the case.

An experienced multidisciplinary approach and an early treatment with drainages or video-assisted thorascopic surgery (VATS) techniques are critical to rich a positive outcome.

Case report
A 48-year-old male patient was admitted to the Emergency Service reporting a 4 days history of toothache, dyspnea, chest pain, sweating, tachyarrhythmia, sore throat, and fever (38.2°C).

On initial examination, there was gross swelling of the lower right cheek, of the submandibular and mental regions, which were erythematous and warm on palpation. The patient had difficulties in opening the jaw. The mucous membrane of his oral cavity had inflammatory changes.

The patient was treated at home with ceftriaxone-steroids-based 3 g once daily.

However, the treatment resulted ineffective and the condition of the patient worsened. He started accusing dyspnea and chest pain.

After the hospital admission, blood test examinations revealed an increase in the amount of white blood cells (WBC = 17 × 109/L), neutrophils (88%), and the level of C-reactive protein (4 mg/L). Urgent orotracheal intubation was performed; then, an in-depth analysis of chest and neck CT scan showed left pleural effusion, mediastinitis, and right parapharyngeal abscess due to possible complication of an odontogenic infection.

A professional ENT performed a drainage of the right neck inserting the drain by cervicotomy in the subcutaneous tissue of the submandibular space, while a left chest drain was placed on the left sixth intercostal space by a thoracic surgeon in order to improve ventilation.

At this time, intravenous antibiotic therapy was initiated with 4 × 500 mg of piperacillin sodium plus tazobactam sodium die.

Although drainage and intravenous therapies had been implemented, the clinical condition of the patient worsened and after 2 days he was transferred to an Intensive Care Unit.

The patient underwent a chest and neck CT scan that demonstrated the presence of air collection in the right submandibular, in the left carotid, in the retroesophageal and pretracheal spaces (Figs. 1A-B and 2). Other collections characterized by air and fluids where noted in the upper, anterior, and posterior mediastinum (Fig. 1C-E). Those findings suggested that the final diagnosis was cervical necrotizing fasciitis with DNM derived.Fig. 1 (A-E) Cervical and thoracic CT scan show air collection at the left carotid space (A). Left subclavian space and retroesophageal space are also involved by infection (B). Other collections are placed on the upper (C), anterior and posterior mediastinum (D, E). Bilateral pleural effusions are noted (asterisks in C, D, and E).

Fig 1Fig. 2 Neck CT scan with sagittal reconstruction depicts air collections at pretracheal space, danger space, and prevertebral space.

Fig 2

Since bilateral pleural effusions were also noted, an additive pleural drain was inserted on the right side (Fig. 1).

After 1 day, a chest and neck CT angiography displayed the presence of abscesses in the cervical spaces, an extensive mediastinal empyema, a left pleural effusion and right hydropneumothorax (Figs. 3B and 4A-C). Aggressive mediastinal debridement and VATS were performed to clear out empyema collections located in the upper retrosternal space, in the anterior and posterior mediastinum spaces (1100 mL of yellow-brown secretion). Then, the ENT specialist performed an incision and drainage of the neck abscesses, inserting 2 surgical drains. In addition, the patient was subjected to an oral tooth extraction (48th). The purulent fluid in the cavity below was drained and packed by the maxillofacial surgical team.Fig. 3 (A, B) Left sagittal CT angiography reconstruction displays rim-enhancing fluid collections at left carotid space and pretracheal space (A). Coronal CT angiography reconstruction shows abscesses on the cervical spaces, right hydropneumothorax, and extensive mediastinal empyema (B).

Fig 3Fig. 4 (A, B) Cervical and thoracic CT angiography represent extensive mediastinal empyema on the anterior mediastinum (A), on the retrosternal space and posterior mediastinum (B). Multiloculated bilateral pleural effusions (triangles) and right hydropneumothorax (asterisk) are also displayed.

Fig 4

Microscopy and culture of aspirated fluids and abscesses from cervical and mediastinal spaces revealed the growth of Streptococcus anginosus, Gemella morbillorum, and Staphylococcus lugdunensis.

At this time, antibiotic therapy was initiated with the following regimen:­ Amoxicillin 1000 mg intravenously, 6 hourly.

­ Metronidazole 500 mg intravenously, 12 hourly.

­ Finally, the patient was dismissed in better health conditions 1 week later.



Discussion
DNM is one of the most lethal mediastinitis with a current mortality rate around 20%-40% [1,2].

The most common origins of DNM infection are peritonsillar, dental, and odontogenic abscesses [3]. However, the dental infection is the most usual cause of cervical necrotizing fasciitis, with a prevalence of 43% [4].

Our report is focused on a complicated case of mediastinitis in a healthy 48-year-old man affected by odontogenic abscess. The lethality of this disease is linked to the spreading of the infection at the mediastinum through fascial cervical planes.

Therefore, the knowledge of the anatomy is crucial for the diagnosis and management of DNM.

Research shows that there are 3 primary layers of the deep cervical fascia interesting the spread of the oropharyngeal infections to the mediastinum: pretracheal, retropharyngeal, and lateral pharyngeal [5], [6], [7].

When the infection spreads simultaneously into the anterior, middle, and posterior (known as “danger space”) mediastinal spaces, as our clinical case suggests, it can lead to a dangerous inflammation complicated by a wide empyema.

The diagnosis of DNM can be difficult. The infection may be clinically dull for a long time or the symptoms can be weakened by the usage of analgesics [8].

When the diagnosis is made, there is usually an advanced condition of sepsis.

Thus, an early diagnostic CT scan is required to analyze both neck and chest and the mediastinal drainage is recommended.

According to Cortsen et al [9], the mortality rate of the patients who underwent neck and thoracic drainage compared with those who performed neck drainage alone, was statistically significant (P< 0.05).

In addition, Scaglione et al [10] demonstrated that CT scan was more efficient than radiographic examinations of chest and neck in confirming diagnosis of soft tissue infiltration, fluid collections with or without the presence of gas bubbles (pneumomediastinum). According to researchers, CT angiography allows to detect the presence of infection in the neck: thickening of the cutis and subcutis, reticular enhancement of the subcutaneous fat, thickening and/or enhancement of cervical fasciae and/or muscles, cervical and mediastinal fluid collections, mediastinal empyema, pleural or pericardial effusions, venous thrombosis, and lymphadenopathy [7,[10], [11], [12], [13].

Endo et al (1999) established guidelines and DNM CT classification for surgical management, exploiting the degree of extension of infection diagnosed which were:1. DNM-type I, localized in the upper mediastinum above the tracheal bifurcation.

2. DNM-type IIA, localized to the lower anterior mediastinum.

3. DNM-type IIB, localized to the anterior and lower posterior mediastinum.



As Endo's classification suggested, our clinical case was categorized as DNM-type IIB [14].

For this type of infection, there is an extended literature for combined cervicotomy and thoracotomy with wide debridement to evacuate all infected and necrotic tissues [15,16].

However, these invasive methods are high-risk approaches for critically ill patients with overwhelming sepsis and may lead to unfavorable outcomes with complications [17].

Many authors reported a successful management of DNM patients with VATS, underpinning the excellent visualization of the entire thoracic cavity, the lower degree of invasiveness and easiness of reaching a favorable outcome [18,19].

To summarize, we have illustrated the importance of using CT scan in order to study DNM cases.

CT scan is a necessary and sufficient tool for detecting and confirming the diagnosis, for assessing a right therapy and avoiding possible complications in a patient who need to undergo a surgical treatment.

CT scan should be executed routinely every 48 hours until the disease improve [6].

The usage of advanced CT scanner with multidetector technology through isotropic voxel dataset has permitted useful multiplanar reconstructions [10], [11], [12].

The absence of suspicious CT signs of infection in the neck or chest spaces excluded DNM with a sensitivity of 100% [10].

Finally, a multidisciplinary approach has demonstrated the success of DNM treatment: an early-stage TC study combined with an antibiotic therapy, a surgical intervention and the aid of Intensive Care Unit, had guaranteed the treatment and the quick recovery of a patient affected by DMN disease.

Authors’ Contributions: The conception and design of the study: CB and UB; Acquisition of data: GF and DD; Drafting the article: AM and VNT; Revising it critically for important intellectual content: UB and CB; Responsible for the surgical intervention: FM; Final approval: All authors.

Guarantor: Caterina Benedetto.

Competing Interests: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Informed Consent: The authors obtained from the patient written informed consent for the publication of this case report and images.
