Highlights
What do we already know about this topic?
CAH patients need stress dosing in case of infection or stress.

How does your research contribute to the field?
COVID doesn’t pose higher risk in CAH infants compared to other stressors.

What are your research’s implications towards theory, practice, or policy?
Whereas COVID may be worrisome in infants with underlying CAH, outcome may be favorable
if the infant is diagnosed and treated properly.

Introduction
SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus that originated in Wuhan, China in December 2019, has
caused a pandemic that has affected more than 2.3 million individuals by April 20, 2020.1 About 22% of those affected are less than 18 years old and most presented with fever,
cough, and shortness of breath. Unlike 10% to 33% of the adult population, only 5.7% to 20%
of known pediatric patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection required hospitalizations.2 Despite the overall seemingly favorable prognosis in pediatrics, few cases have been
reported in infants with underlying medical disorders.

We present a case report of an infant with a prior diagnosis of congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (CAH) who was found to have SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Case Report
A 5-week-old infant with CAH presented to the Emergency Room (ER) with fever and
fussiness.

He was born at 40 weeks gestation via C-section for failure to progress to a G1P1 mother
with negative prenatal serologies. APGAR scores were 8 and 9. Initial newborn course was
complicated by hypoglycemia, respiratory distress and tachypnea which resolved by day 2 of
life.

On day 3 of life, the newborn screening test was positive for congenital adrenal
hyperplasia. Pediatric endocrinology was consulted. Cortisol level obtained on day 2 of life
was 1.2 mcg/dL (2.9-19.4 mcg/dL) and 17-hydroxyprogesterone was 813 ng/dL (85-250 ng/dL). An
ACTH [CortrosynTM] stimulation test was performed and confirmed the diagnosis
with 1-hour post-stimulation 17 hydroxyprogesterone level of 17 836 ng/dl [85-250 ng/dL] and
cortisol level of 3.9 mcg/dl. The infant was initiated on hydrocortisone therapy at 30 mg/m²
per day, fludrocortisone 0.1 mg daily and Sodium chloride (table salt) 2 grams divided in
several feedings.

The infant presented to the ER at 5 weeks of age with fever and increased fussiness. There
was no respiratory distress, diarrhea, vomiting, rash, or decreased feeding. His father
reported symptoms of cough and a runny nose for a few days prior to this. On physical
examination, he was afebrile with oxygen saturation of 100%. He was noted to be irritable
and his skin was mottled (Figure 1).
He did not have chest retractions, tachypnea, or nasal flaring. Laboratory results revealed
WBC 7.2 bil/L (5-19.5 bil/L), neutrophils 2.1 bil/L (1-9 bil/L), lymphocytes 2.5 bil/L
(2.5-16.5 bil/L), monocytes 2 bil/L (0.4-1.4 bil/L), Na 136 mmol/L (134-144 mmol/L),
potassium 5.9 mmol/L (4-6 mmol/L), HCO3 22 mmol/L (20-28 mmol/L), glucose of 110 mg/dL
(60-99 mg/dL), BUN 8 mg/dL (3-17 mg/dL), creatinine 0.33 mg/dL (0.1-0.36 mg/dL), and CRP
1.9 mg/L (0-7.9 mg/L). SARS-CoV-2 by Nucleic Acid Amplification (NAA) was detected on
nasopharyngeal swab. Pediatric infectious disease specialists were consulted. Blood culture,
urinalysis, and urine culture were negative. Chest x-ray demonstrated mild streaky bilateral
perihilar streaks with no focal consolidation or pleural effusions. Costophrenic angles were
clear with unremarkable lung apices and bronchoalveolar marking.

Figure 1. Mottling of skin on left leg.

He was placed on triple maintenance hydrocortisone for stress dosing every 8 hours along
with fludrocortisone 0.15 mg daily. He received a normal saline bolus and was then placed on
maintenance IV fluids. He was transferred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) and
Pediatric infectious disease specialists were consulted. Over the course of his admission,
he remained hemodynamically stable. He fed appropriately and did not require respiratory
support. He was discharged 2 days after admission and his stress hydrocortisone dose was
weaned down to his home regimen. At the time of this submission, he has been home for
4 weeks and doing well.

Discussion
Since the start of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, several studies have been published pertaining
to clinical presentation in various age groups, possible management options and its
implications in patients with other comorbidities. To our knowledge, this is the first case
report of SARS-CoV-2 infection in an infant with underlying adrenal insufficiency secondary
to CAH. Our patient presented with fever and irritability that was worrisome given his age,
the current pandemic and his underlying adrenal insufficiency. He was admitted to rule out
sepsis given his age. Laboratory analysis revealed normal leucocyte count, CRP and
electrolytes for age. He remained clinically stable and did not require any respiratory
support. During his illness, his clinical presentation was limited to fever, runny nose,
fussiness, and skin mottling. Interestingly, a prior case report of a 2-week-old infant with
SARS-CoV-2 noted skin and soft tissue infection.3

In a study conducted on 2143 pediatric patients in China, more than 90% of pediatric
patients were asymptomatic or had mild disease presenting with cough and fever without
desaturation or gastrointestinal involvement.4 Fever among these children was noted to be 38-39 C. Few patients (<3%) had oxygen
saturation below 92nd percentile.5 In patients with severe illness defined as dyspnea, central cyanosis, or oxygen
desaturation, 10% were in infants < 1 year old compared to prevalence of 3% in 16 to
17 year olds.4,5 Most children who required
intensive care had other comorbidities including: intussusception, leukemia, and hydronephrosis.5 In a study conducted on 66 children, 69% had normal leucocyte count. Neutrophilia,
neutropenia, lymphopenia, and elevated inflammatory markers like CRP were less
common.5,6

Our case suggests that SARS-CoV-2 in an infant may demonstrate a fairly stable clinical
course even in the presence of underlying adrenal insufficiency. In a longitudinal
assessment of 156 patients with CAH, gastrointestinal and upper respiratory illnesses were
the predominant reasons for stress dosing, adrenal crises, and hospital admissions.7 It was also noted that stress dosing was more common in children compared to adults
which could potentially be attributed to the fact that parents tend to be more vigilant
about their children’s presentation and need for management compared to adults treating themselves.7 Our patient had an uneventful course of illness and responded well to stress dosing
that was started appropriately at the onset of illness. Recent studies in adult population
have demonstrated a role for dexamethasone in the management of severe COVID-19 infections
requiring hospitalizations. According to Horby et al8, dexamethasone use decreased 28-day mortality in patients requiring oxygen or
mechanical ventilation.1 Thus, while our patient was placed on hydrocortisone due to adrenal insufficiency, it
may have also contributed and ameliorated response to SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Author Contributions: HA, PG, JS & SK: contributed to conception and design; contributed to acquisition,
analysis, and interpretation; drafted manuscript; critically revised manuscript; gave
final approval; agrees to be accountable for all aspects of work ensuring itegrity and
accuracy.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

ORCID iD: Haya Azouz 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2321-5528

Informed consent: This is to confirm that a written informed consent for patient information and images to
be published was provided by the parent who is a legally authorized representative on the
behalf of the patient.
