Case Presentation
A 57-year-old female with family history of mitral valve prolapse presented to the hospital
with altered mental status, preceded with 1 week of fatigue, generalized weakness, episodes
of nonbloody vomiting, and diarrhea. Patient denied chest pressure, chest pain, fever, or
history of intravenous drug use. On presentation, vitals were within normal limits except
for heart rate of 135 beats per minute. Physical examination showed a thin, dry, lethargic
female with Janeway lesions over palms and soles (white arrows, Figure 1A and B), Osler nodes (red arrow, Figure 1A), and splinter hemorrhages (Figure 1C). The heart rhythm was
regular, and no murmurs were appreciated. Laboratory findings were significant for white
blood cell count of 17 000/mm3 (normal 3700-11 000/mm3), hemoglobin of
11.7 g/dL (normal 12.0-16.7 g/dL), platelets 89 000/mm3 (normal 135 000-400
000/mm3), and point of care troponin of 0.28 ng/mL (normal 0.00-0.034 ng/mL).
Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed sinus tachycardia with nonspecific ST-wave changes. Blood
cultures were drawn, and patient was started on intravenous fluids and empiric intravenous
antibiotics (ceftriaxone and vancomycin). Follow-up troponin returned at 0.85, and heparin
drip was initiated. Patient was chest pain free. Serial EKG revealed persistent sinus
tachycardia without ST-segment changes. Computed tomography (CT) scan of brain showed
subacute infarcts in the cerebral hemispheres, and CT scan of chest and abdomen also showed
infarctions in the kidney and spleen. Heparin drip was stopped at that time. Transthoracic
echocardiogram (TTE) was ordered, and cardiology was consulted. Blood cultures turned
positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. TTE showed an
ejection fraction (EF) of 55% without vegetations. On day 3 of hospitalization, patient
experienced chest pain, with repeat EKG showing new diffuse ST-segment elevation and PR
depression consistent with pericarditis. Patient was treated with nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs with symptomatic relief. Repeat TTE was requested and showed EF of
35% to 40% with severe diffuse hypokinesis of the apical wall and a possible vegetation on
mitral valve. Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was scheduled on day 4, confirming EF of
30% to 35% with severe hypokinesis and medium-sized, 1.3 cm (L) × 1.0 cm (W), mobile
vegetation on the atrial aspect of the tip of the anterior leaflet of mitral valve
associated with moderate to severe mitral valve regurgitation (red arrow, Figure 2B). Cardiothoracic surgery was
consulted. Post TEE, patient developed shortness of breath and decompensated rapidly into
cardiogenic shock. Patient was placed on vasopressor support. Troponin trended up to 49.50
ng/mL. An emergent cardiac catheterization revealed no signs of atherosclerotic coronary
artery disease but a 100% occlusion of the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery
suspicious for a septic embolus (blue arrow, Figure 2A). Patient was transferred to cardiac
intensive care unit for further stabilization. The following day, patient underwent
successful mitral valve replacement with coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG; left
internal mammary artery to LAD). Gross specimen showed vegetations involving the mitral
valve leaflets (Figure 2C). Patient
did well in the postoperative period and was discharged to a rehabilitation center 2 weeks
later in stable condition with 6 weeks of intravenous antibiotics (cefazolin 2 g
intravenously every 8 hours) from the date of the surgery, metoprolol tartrate, furosemide,
and potassium chloride.

Figure 1. Multiple nontender and noncompressible macular spots of varying sizes over both hand
(A) and foot (B) known as Janeway lesions (white arrows). Also a painful, red, raised
lesion found on the hand (A) known as Osler nodule (red arrow). (C) Splinter hemorrhage
underneath fingernail.

Figure 2. (A) Angiogram of left anterior descending coronary artery showing 100% occlusion
without evidence of atherosclerotic coronary artery disease concerning for a septic
embolus (blue arrow). (B) Transesophageal echo view showing medium-sized, 1.3 cm (L) ×
1.0 cm (W), mobile vegetation on the atrial aspect of the tip of the anterior leaflet of
mitral valve (red arrow). (C) Gross specimen showing vegetation involving the mitral
valve leaflets.

Discussion
Infective endocarditis (IE) is a life-threatening multisystem disease that results from an
infection of the endocardial surface of the heart, which may include heart valves, mural
endocardium, or a septal defect. IE is almost inevitably fatal if left untreated, and often
has long-lasting complications even in patients who survive. Acute myocardial infarction
(AMI) secondary to septic coronary emboli is rare, and usually fatal.1 In a case series of 586 patients with IE, the incidence of acute coronary syndrome
(ACS) was 2.9% (14 patients).2 Risk factors associated with increased coronary embolism include the presence of
mobile vegetation, vegetation size greater than 10 mm, Staphylococcus
aureus or non-viridans streptococcal infections, and previous embolism.3,4 ACS usually occurs within the first 15 days
of disease onset.2 There have been different approaches used for the treatment of septic coronary
emboli. These include balloon embolectomy, coronary stent placement, anticoagulation,
fibrinolysis, surgical embolectomy, and CABG. Coronary stent placement or balloon
embolectomy can be complicated by stent infection, emboli dislodgement, or mycotic aneurysm
resulting in coronary rupture.5 Septic emboli consist of inflammatory cells and bacterial colonies with small
proportion of fibrin and platelets6; therefore, tissue plasminogen activator and anticoagulation seem ineffective, and
increase risk of hemorrhage,2 especially in the setting of acute embolic stroke. Surgical embolectomy has been
cited with good results; however, a direct incision into the coronary artery would increase
the risk of contamination resulting in bacterial myocarditis that can lead to rupture of a
ventricle.1,7 In contrast, emergent CABG
presents a viable option for reperfusion of the myocardium while avoiding the complications
seen in other interventions. In this case, the combined benefit of mitral valve replacement
and bypass grafting outweighed the risk of surgical intervention.

Management dilemmas include the decisions to proceed with coronary angiography, surgical
timing, and risk of renal failure. Previously, it was believed that coronary angiography in
patients with IE was safe if no vegetation was observed on the aortic valve.8 Because of this, preoperative coronary angiography was only reserved for sets of
patients who presented with ST-elevation. However, there are cases such as ours where the
ST-elevations may not be obvious, and this could result in a missed diagnosis of ACS.
Overall, guidelines do not recommend coronary angiography for non–ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), but do recommend diagnostic coronary angiography for STEMI.
Preoperative coronary angiography can be carried out safely, with regard to the risk of
complications of cerebral embolization or acute kidney injury.9 Another challenge in management is timing of potential surgery, especially in
patients with concomitant cerebral infarcts, and risk of hemorrhagic transformation, but
there is no evidence of worse outcomes with earlier cardiac bypass surgery.10 Although an average delay of less than 5 days between preoperative angiogram was
previously described as a risk factor for postoperative renal failure and mortality, in the
setting of total LAD artery occlusion, decreasing EF, and cardiogenic shock, we had no
choice but to proceed with surgery. The decision to delay surgical intervention would
increase risk for morbidity and mortality, or ultimate end-stage heart failure requiring
cardiac replacement therapies.

Follow-up and Outcome
Repeat TTE on postoperative day 1 showed EF of 10%. EF improved to 20% on postoperative day
5. Unfortunately, 3 weeks after discharge, the patient had witnessed a seizure in the
rehabilitation facility and Emergency Medical Services was called. Patient went into
pulseless electrical activity (PEA) en route to hospital, cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) was performed with return of spontaneous circulation. Patient was found to have
potassium of 8, elevated troponins, and lactic acid. CT scan of brain showed evolution of
the previously known ischemic infarctions with no acute or hemorrhagic components. Stat TTE
postcardiac arrest (postoperative day 34) was unchanged from previous echocardiogram prior
to discharge with EF of 20%. Cardiac arrest was likely secondary to seizure causing
hyperkalemia followed by PEA arrest. There were no structural or dynamic changes in the TTE.
Patient did not regain consciousness with resuscitative methods and was terminally extubated
on postoperative day 35.

Conclusion
There are no clear guidelines for management of AMI due to IE. Diagnostic angiography of
coronary arteries should be obtained in patients with active IE presenting with elevated
troponins or acute left ventricular dysfunction seen on echocardiography. Coronary artery
occlusion should prompt immediate cardiothoracic surgery evaluation for consideration of
emergent CABG with simultaneous valve replacement.

The authors gratefully acknowledge and thank our patient for the kind support.

Author Contributions: Mohammed Ali Faluk, Steven Vuu, Kiran Kathi, Ramy Abdelamaseih, and Christian Cignoni
wrote the original draft of the paper. Mohammed Ali Faluk participated in gathering the
data for the case and also compiling the draft. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: This research was supported (in whole or
in part) by HCA Healthcare and/or HCA Healthcare affiliated entity. The views expressed in
this publication represent those of author(s) and do not necessarily represent the
official views of HCA Healthcare or any of its affiliated entities.

Ethics Approval: Our institution does not require ethical approval for reporting individual cases or case
series.

Informed Consent: Written and verbal informed consent was obtained from the patient for their anonymized
information to be published in this article. Special thanks to our patient.
