History of Presentation

We report a case of a 41-year-old man with no significant past medical history who presented with 3 weeks of lower extremity edema, fatigue, and shortness of breath. On presentation, he appeared pale and had melenic stool on rectal examination. The patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (ICU) for resuscitation and urgent endoscopy, which revealed multiple gastric ulcers. Further work-up revealed diffuse lymphadenopathy concerning for metastatic lymphoma; excisional biopsy was performed with pathology findings consistent with Hodgkin lymphoma. His hospital course was subsequently complicated by acute renal failure requiring temporary hemodialysis, acute respiratory failure requiring intubation, and septic shock requiring vasopressor support with norepinephrine at a dose of 18 μg/min. While the patient was sedated with continuous infusions of propofol and fentanyl on the ventilator in the ICU, telemetry displayed a sudden onset of ST-segment elevations. Physical examination was notable for significant abdominal distention; no murmurs were detected on cardiac auscultation. Vital signs were notable for blood pressure of 101/57 mm Hg, heart rate of 112 beats/min, respiratory rate of 23 breaths/min, and an oxygen saturation of 99% on mechanical ventilation.Learning Objectives

• To make a differential diagnosis for ST-segment elevation on ECG and to distinguish STEMI from other noncardiac disorders.

• To recognize severe gastrointestinal distention as a rare cause of ST-segment elevation.

Investigations

Electrocardiography (ECG) following onset of ST-segment elevations on telemetry demonstrated sinus tachycardia with apparent ST-segment elevations in the precordial leads with accompanying deep T-wave inversions, J-point depression in the inferior leads, and marked QT prolongation (Figure 1). The ECG was interpreted by the computer algorithm as a, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), so emergency cardiology consultation was requested. Laboratory findings revealed a troponin-T level of <0.01 ng/ml, potassium of 4.3 mEq/l, calcium of 7.6 mg/dl, anion gap of 12 mEq/l, hemoglobin of 10.1 g/dl, and hematocrit of 29.4%. Arterial blood gas showed a pH of 7.40, bicarbonate of 21 mmol/l, and lactate of 3.1 mmol/l. Bedside transthoracic echocardiogram showed the left ventricular ejection fraction to be 60% to 65% with no regional wall motion abnormalities or evidence of pericardial effusion. However, on placement of the ultrasound probe in the epigastric region, there was abrupt resolution of ST-segment elevations on telemetry. There was no significant degree of abdominal compression associated with the ultrasound examination. The telemetry changes were confirmed on continuous 12-lead rhythm strips, in which gentle palpation of the abdomen led to immediate resolution of ST-segment elevations (Figures 2 and 3). A subsequent kidney, ureter, and abdominal radiograph confirmed the presence of significant gastric distention and findings consistent with ileus (Figure 4).Figure 1 ECG Following Onset of ST-Segment Elevations on Telemetry

A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) with apparent ST-segment elevations in the precordial leads with accompanying deep T-wave inversions, J-point depression in the inferior leads, and marked QT prolongation.

Figure 2 12-Lead Continuous ECG With Abdominal Palpation

12-lead continuous electrocardiogram (ECG) initially with ST-segment elevations in precordial leads. Following abdominal palpation with an ultrasound probe, ST-segment elevations resolved. Onset of abdominal palpation is denoted by the red arrow.

Figure 3 12-Lead Continuous ECG With Release of Abdominal Palpation

Following release of abdominal pressure, ST-segment elevations were demonstrated again. Offset of abdominal palpation is denoted by the red arrow. ECG = electrocardiogram.

Figure 4 Abdominal Radiograph of Gastrointestinal Distention

Abdominal radiograph demonstrated significant gastric distention along with colonic ileus.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis included the following:1. STEMI

2. Pericarditis

3. Stress-induced (Takotsubo) cardiomyopathy

4. Noncardiac causes of ST-segment elevation, including acute cholecystitis, community-acquired pneumonia, intracranial hemorrhage, gastrointestinal distention, and pancreatitis

Management

Following gastric decompression with nasogastric tube placement, ECG demonstrated resolution of ST-segment elevations (Figure 5). Coronary angiography was deferred. During the remainder of the hospital course, there were no further documented ST-segment changes on telemetry or repeat ECG. However, the patient remained critically ill, with development of new-onset seizures and focal neurological deficits. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain confirmed leptomeningeal enhancement concerning for metastatic spread. After extensive discussion with family, the patient was placed on comfort care because of his grave prognosis, and he died soon thereafter.Figure 5 Follow-Up ECG After Gastrointestinal Decompression

A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) following gastrointestinal decompression demonstrating normal sinus rhythm.

Discussion

Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) refers to the clinical manifestation of acute myocardial injury secondary to ischemia. STEMI is the most serious and high-risk manifestation of ACS, and it requires prompt recognition and intervention. ECG is the diagnostic mainstay for this condition. However, in the setting of an atypical pattern of STEMI with findings of marked repolarization abnormality, as demonstrated in our case, thorough examination and history remain vital because other disorders may mimic STEMI on ECG. Noncardiac causes of ST-segment elevation include acute cholecystitis, pancreatitis, community-acquired pneumonia, and intracranial hemorrhage (1).

There have been prior reported cases of gastrointestinal distention mimicking a STEMI pattern on ECG (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8). In 4 of 7 cases, coronary angiography confirmed no evidence of obstructive coronary artery disease (Table 1). In all the reported cases, ECG findings resolved with management and resolution of the underlying gastrointestinal issue. Our case uniquely adds a physical maneuver (abdominal palpation) resulting in acute and dynamic reversal of ST-segment elevations on continuous 12-lead ECG.Table 1 Characteristics of Prior Cases of Gastrointestinal Distention Leading to ST-Segment Elevations on ECG

First Author	Symptoms	Clinical Feature	Territory of STE	TTE	Catherization	Troponin, ng/ml	
Parikh et al.	Vomiting, epigastric pain	SBO	II, III, aVF	N/A	70% stenosis RCA, 40% stenosis LAD; both nonobstructive	0.04	
Hibbs et al.	Nausea, emesis, abdominal pain	Small bowel ileus	II, III, aVF, V4–6	Normal	Normal coronary arteries (coronary CTA)	<0.01	
Herath et al.	Nausea, emesis, abdominal discomfort	Colonic obstruction	V1–V3	Normal	N/A	Negative	
Asada et al.	Chest discomfort	Distended stomach conduit	II, III, aVF	Left atrial and ventricular compression	Normal coronary arteries	Negative	
Patel et al.	Nausea, emesis	SBO (ileum)	II, III, aVF, V4–6	Inferior wall hypokinesis	Normal coronary arteries	N/A	
Mixon et al.	Nausea, emesis, abdominal pain, fever	Partial SBO	V1–V3	Right atrial and ventricular compression	N/A	Negative	
Jawa et al.	None	Gastric distention, ileus	II, III, aVF	N/A	N/A	Negative	
CTA = computed tomography angiography; N/A = not applicable; SBO = small bowel obstruction; STE = ST-segment elevation; TTE = transthoracic echocardiogram

Although the exact pathophysiology is unknown, multiple mechanisms have been proposed by which gastrointestinal distention mimics ECG findings of STEMI (Central Illustration). These include the following: 1) cardiac displacement relative to other intrathoracic organs; 2) visceral-cardiac reflex resulting in elevated vagal tone; 3) stress-induced cardiomyopathy; 4) pericarditis; and 5) a direct irritative or compressive effect of the heart from gastric distention (2,4,8).Central Illustration Gastric Distention as a Cause of ST-Segment Elevation and the Proposed Mechanisms Leading to This Effect

Noncardiac disorders may mimic ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction on electrocardiogram. Such causes include gastric distention, pancreatitis, intracranial hemorrhage, cholecystitis. and pneumonia. The effect of gastric distention on electrocardiogram is highlighted in this case report, as well as the proposed mechanisms leading to this effect.

It has been described previously that changes in diaphragmatic positioning can result in displacement of the heart, thus causing ECG changes such as leftward shift of the QRS axis and electrical alternans (9). It is conceptually possible that significant gastric dilation may cause a positional shift of the diaphragm. However, there were no significant changes in QRS axis or electrical alternans on ECG demonstrated in our previous cases. Another mechanism to consider is a visceral-cardiac reflex, by which increased vagal tone leads to coronary hypoperfusion. However, the concept of a visceral-cardiac reflex is unlikely because our patient did not demonstrate bradycardia or fluctuations in heart rate. The proposed mechanism of stress-induced cardiomyopathy, which involves catecholamine-induced microvascular spasm and dysfunction, does not appear to explain the observed dynamic changes on ECG in our case. Furthermore, there were no regional wall motion changes on bedside echocardiogram to suggest stress-induced cardiomyopathy. Finally, pericarditis is an unlikely cause, given the rapid reversibility and lack of other supporting findings present on echocardiogram (i.e., pericardial effusion) or ECG (i.e., diffuse ST-segment elevations, PR depressions).

Thus, it remains that the most likely mechanism is a direct compressive or irritative effect of gastric dilatation on the heart. We hypothesize that the unusual ECG findings of our case can be explained by direct pressure on the abdomen somehow relieving or shifting this regional effect. Ultimately, gastric decompression led to rapid resolution of ST-segment elevations in our case.

Conclusions

There is significant evidence that acute gastrointestinal distention is a rare but known cause of acute ST-segment elevation on ECG. It is important to distinguish this presentation from that of STEMI because recognition of alternate causes of ST-segment elevation may prevent unnecessary treatment and invasive procedures such as cardiac catherization.

The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.

The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information, visit the JACC: Case Reportsauthor instructions page.
