pmc1 Introduction

Complicated Inguinal hernia is a common surgical pathology affecting predominantly males with neglected or long-standing hernia [1]. Some of these men sought surgical intervention due to peritonitis resulting from perforated ischaemic viscus with often limited repair options after resuscitation and bowel surgery [1], [2]. At the same time bowel and hernia surgeries, the standard open mesh or endo-laparoscopic hernia repairs modalities are often limited by potential catastrophic infections for which the choice of tissue-based repair is viewed as a better option by most surgeons worldwide [3], [4], [5], [6]. Further depression of the natural immunity of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infected patients by the major surgery or acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) predisposes the wounds to prolonged healing. Generally, current literature is rather void of evidence-based guidelines regarding the optimal method of repair in heavily contaminated hernias in patients with HIV infection [5]. The choice of synthetic or biological mesh and the several open-tissue base repairs in the anticipated infection remains unclear. As such, deferred hernia repairs after bowel resection and anastomosis for future open mesh or endo-laparoscopic procedure, the use of biological or other modified mesh, and tissue-based repairs for same time surgery are all currently in practice [5]. Aside from the economic burden, inconvenience of repeated surgeries and exposure to repeated anaesthetic complications, a good outcome of these repair modalities are not guaranteed in retroviral-positive patients with potential deficient immunity.

We present a case of a retroviral-positive adult male with peritonitis resulting from the caecal perforation in a strangulated right inguinoscrotal hernia. The hernia was managed by herniotomy and nylon darn repair of the posterior wall after resuscitation and right hemicolectomy. He developed prolonged deep incisional surgical site infection with exposure of the repair, scrotal abscess and acute weight loss which was managed by wound dressing, antibiotics, and nutritional supplementation. Six years after discharge he is doing very well with no evidence of hernia recurrence. By presenting this case and a review, we hope additional evidence from our detailed observation of the exposed repair may provide further scientific bases when selecting nylon darn. This, we view as an optimal hernia repair method in a population at the highest risk of infection including HIV/AIDS patients since there is limited treatment option and knowledge.

2 Case presentation

This study is registered with a unique identification: research registry 7358 which is found in the link: https://www.researchregistry.com/browse-the-registry#home/ [7]. The manuscript was prepared and presented in line with the SCARE reporting criteria by Agha et al. [8].

A 48-year-old peasant crop farmer presented with a 2-day history of generalised abdominal pains, fever and passing scanty urine. This was preceded by a 5-day history of painful irreducible right groin swelling associated with absolute constipation and vomiting. He first noticed the swelling 11 years ago which was reducible with occasional episodes of irreducibility which he usually manipulated to reduce. There was no prior history of lower urinary tract symptoms, chronic cough, chronic constipation, or any co-morbidity.

Physical examination revealed an ill-looking patient, pale, jaundiced, dehydrated, and febrile (temperature of 39.2 degrees Celsius). The respiratory and pulse rates were 25 breaths/min and 108 beats/min respectively with a blood pressure of 98/55 mmHg. The abdomen was globally distended, tense with peritonism, and a less tender irreducible right inguinoscrotal swelling. A diagnosis of septic shock from a complicated right inguinal hernia was made.

Resuscitation: Intravenous fluid (normal saline and dextrose saline), Intravenous ciprofloxacin 400 mg, metronidazole 500 mg, intranasal oxygen-4 L/min, adrenaline (1 vial in 500mls normal saline) and transfused 2 pints of blood. Nasogastric tube and urethral catheter passed. He was optimal with the following vitals recording before surgery without intensive care unit admission: Urine output >0.6 ml/kg/hour. SPO2 -94%, blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rates were 115/70 mmHg, 86 bpm, and 22 cycles respectively.

Investigation: Full Blood Count (FBC) - haemoglobin 7.4 g/dL, leucocytosis of 21 × 103 with differential neutrophilia of 83%, and decreased platelets level (58 × 103). Blood urea - 11.2 mmol/L, creatinine – 162 μmol/L. Retroviral tested positive and random blood sugar- 6.1 mmol/L. There was no diagnostic investigation. The American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) score was III. He was counseled for surgery to which he gave informed consent.

3 Surgery

Under general anaesthesia, intubated and cuffed, an extended midline incision was made to enter the abdominal cavity. Findings in the abdominal cavity were free fluid with faecal matter, herbal residue, and extensive exudate. A gangrenous perforated caecum with mattered small bowel. The hernia sac contained redundant large bowel which was guided back into the peritoneal cavity through the oblique groin incision over the swelling. He had right hemicolectomy, herniotomy, nylon darn repair of the posterior wall, and abdominal drain inserted after Peritoneum lavage. The procedure was performed by a urologist in a district hospital.

4 Postoperative care

Post-operatively, he was transfused another pint of blood, continued with the intravenous antibiotics, fluids, and analgesia, 50 mmol intravenous KCL/day in 1.5 L normal saline slowly over 24 hours, intravenous omeprazole 40 mg daily, and maintained nil per oral route. He started graded oral intake after 72 hours and oral medications. However, he took several days to resume full feeds. Intravenous combine vitamins and local formulated high carbohydrate diet were also introduced. He progressively lost weight and by week 4, he had lost 13.2 kg but remained stable.

5 Wound care

The wound was exposed on day 2 postoperatively, cleaned with savlon and normal saline, and dressed with povidone-soaked gauze cover. Both wounds were observed to be discharging serosanguinous fluid and by day 3 it was draining offensive pus with the massive scrotal collection and copious exudate from beneath. The wounds were cleaned twice daily with the savlon and irrigated with normal saline and the cavity was packed with povidone‑iodine-soaked gauze. The discharge subsided after 2 weeks, and we reverted to daily dressing. Granulation over the nylon darn sutures started around the 5th week (Fig. 1). He had secondary suturing after the 6th week (Fig. 2). He was discharged after 8 weeks with parts of the abdominal wound healed (Fig. 3). He continued wound dressing at his primary facility with methylated spirit and further investigations and treatment at his chosen Anti-Retroviral Clinic.Fig. 1 Fifth weeks after repair showing gapped wound with nylon darn monofilaments with granulation tissue over the posterior wall repairs.

Fig. 1

Fig. 2 Attempted closure of the groin wound exposing the posterior wall repairs at the 6th week of dressing.

Fig. 2

Fig. 3 Discharged after 8 weeks with a partially healed abdominal wound.

Fig. 3

6 Discussion

The postoperative critical clinical events presented in this case were unexpected but might have been precipitated by his retroviral status. Thus, a weight loss of over 13 kg within 2 weeks was highly unusual. Furthermore, the positive retroviral status coupled with the perforated caecum and soiled peritoneum was the cause of the surgical site infection (SSI). The SSI was both an economic and clinical problem as his admission time, antibiotics treatment, dressing requirement was extended.

The major surgery (right hemicolectomy) and his retroviral status predisposed him to prolonged infection. The intraoperative finding indicates that the nylon darn repair withstood the period of infection and beyond by maintaining the repair despite the level of inflammation. The nylon darn repair is a faster method of repair and easy to handle and is therefore crucial in patients with such acute presentation. Furthermore, the larger pores, minimal surgical knots and nontraumatic suturing were helpful in allowing exudation of purulent substances while maintaining a minimal amount of material in the surgical field. This is shown in Fig. 1.

7 Risk

The risk of inguinal hernia among the HIV-infected population is not exactly known. In Sweden, the incidence was reported to be twice that of the general population and increases to 11.3 per 1000 risk of developing anterior abdominal wall hernia among those on antiretroviral treatment [9]. Separation of the rectus abdominis muscle along the linea alba is a reported feature of HIV-associated lipodystrophy syndrome which is linked to the cause of anterior abdominal wall hernias [10]. These together with SSI are a recipe for failure in any repair.

Identification of patients at high risk of SSI during repair remains key to informing surgeons as to the precautions including the type of repair and postoperative treatment to maximise good outcomes.

To these efforts, several factors or perioperative predictors of SSI include advancing patient age, American Society of Anaesthesiologist [ASA] score > 2, diabetes, smoking, emergency surgery, low resource settings, use of general anaesthesia, immunosuppression, concurrent bilateral and sliding hernias repairs were identified [11], [12]. SSI is noted to occur in 0.5%–17.4% of patients undergoing even elective inguinal hernia repairs with prophylactic antibiotics cover [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. The incidence is much higher if patients presented with an emergency, or the surgeries were conducted at low resource settings [1], [18], [2]. Multiple factors impacted this repair.

The wound infection risk in HIV patients with emergency hernia repairs is not known. The reliance on viral loads and or CD4 counts at the time of surgery in predicting morbidity and mortality are said to also be inconclusive among cases without the advanced disease [19], [20]. Besides, there is less practical daily use of these investigations [19], [20]. Horberg and colleagues however found an increased risk of pneumonia, mortality, and overall complications when viral load exceeds 30,000. Infectious complications in these patients are determined by either the pathophysiological stage of the disease or the magnitude of the procedure [19]. Our patient appeared to have suffered the consequences of advanced disease including immunosuppression, malnutrition, and infections.

Hernia repair options in HIV patients:

The standard open mesh or end-laparoscopic intervention is often avoided when an infection is anticipated to prevent the need for mesh removal even though isolated reports have indicated the safe use in dirty and contaminated wounds [5], [21], [22], [23], [24]. Open mesh repairs have been reported in Amyand hernia after appendicectomy as well as non-traumatic abdominal wall hernia repairs in HIV patients on antiretroviral treatment without post-operation infection [25], [26]. Bassini and Shouldice methods are commonly used to repair complicated or hernias with anticipated infections worldwide [27], [28]. In sub-Saharan Africa however, the Nylon darn is predominant [29], [2], [1], [18]. The choice of nylon darn repairs was based on our set-up and previous experience in using it for complicated hernias.

The current focus of research to design or improve material used for potential infective fields include prolonged absorption duration, spaces of the individual fibers, improvement of the tensile strength, limited knots, limited density, flexibility, biocompatibility, prevent cutting through sutures, and prevent transmission of bacteria through the material [27], [30]. Ideal materials for repairs in these patients should possess a high ability to resist infections and retain its functional strength to such a period that native cellular ingrowth, tissue remodeling, and maturation of collagen is complete to allow a shift of mechanical load. These products must not reduce biocompatibility, cause delayed cellular infiltration and or neovascularization. Modifications such as chemical impregnation, use of poly-4-hydroxybutyrate, and avoiding mesh from porcine or human intestines.

8 Nylon Darn

Nylon Darn as described originally or modified uses a single nylon suture to weave bigger space that appears like the modifications mentioned. It is also bacteria resistant and widely used in other emergency hernia repairs [18], [1]. Nylon sutures have been long used in dirty wounds and wounds that require longer tensile strength or permanent apposition. The elasticity of the single 1 or 2 nylon suture appears not affected by changes in wound medium as exposed (Fig. 1). The spaces (pore size) between fibers are maintained. This is key to avoiding bowel entrapment while allowing purulent material to escape to the surface. Single mono-filament suture weaved has only starting and ending knots and minimal intersections with pull-outs that do not create big holes or tear the fasciae for easy bacterial translocation.

9 Conclusion

Infections are inevitable in complicated hernias with perforated caecum in HIV patients. The clinical progression may include prolonged catabolic state and deep SSI which is often unfavourable for optimal wound healing and weak repair. Successful management although depends on a wide variety of factors, of which the method chosen for repair is paramount. Infected nylon darn appeared to maintain its properties suitable in the repair of complicated hernia in HIV positive patients. We believe nylon darn repair should be widely thought of and selected as the first choice for inguinal hernias with perforated viscus likely to develop prolonged infections in HIV patients.

Sources of funding

NA.

Ethical approval

NA.

Consent

Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.

Research registration

researchregistry7358, https://www.researchregistry.com/browse-the-registry#home/(the usefulness of nylon darn posterior wall repairs in prolonged SSI in HIV patient).

Guarantor

Mahamudu Ayamba Ali (corresponding and 1st author).

Provenance and peer review

Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Mahamudu Ayamba Ali-study concept, design, writing of paper, interpretation, patient care

Israel hagbevor-patient care, data collection

Raymond Saa-Eru Maalman-paper write up, editing, design

Yaw Otchere Donkor- write up, editing, design

lorence Dedey- design, editing, interpretation

Emmanuel Abedi-patient care, data collection

All authors contributed per the guidelines for authorship, read and approved the current form of the manuscript.

Declaration of competing interest

All authors declare no conflict of interest
