pmcCase presentation

A 64-year-old woman was admitted to our clinic for cardiac evaluation due to increasing dyspnoea and oedema of the lower limbs. Laboratory examination revealed an elevated NT-proBNP of 972 pg/mL (reference value: <125 pg/mL). In addition, right axis deviation and signs of right atrial enlargement were detected in the electrocardiogram (see Supplementary material online, Figure S1).

The patient had a history of carcinoid tumour of the terminal ileum with hepatic, lymphatic, and osseous metastasis. Additional to partial ileum resection, she was treated with a somatostatin analogue. Tumour staging and laboratory evaluation had documented partial remission under the aforementioned therapy.

Computed tomography (planimetric valve area: 0.82 cm², Figure 1A–C) and echocardiography demonstrated severe pulmonary stenosis (Figure 1E) and torrential tricuspid regurgitation (coaptation defect: 5 mm; Figure 1C, D, and F; Supplementary material online, Figure S2) with thickening and retraction of leaflets of the valves.

Figure 1 Comprehensive imaging of the right-sided heart valves using cardiac CT and echocardiography.

After evaluation by our collaborative heart team, surgical valve replacement was performed. Even though the surgery and initial postoperative course were uneventful, the patient’s condition gradually worsened. Cardiac complications and carcinoid crises were excluded. Pneumogenic sepsis was identified as the cause of the clinical deterioration. Despite broad-spectrum targeted anti-infective therapy and intensive care measures, the patient died due to therapy-refractory multi-organ failure.

This case highlights the most common clinical features of Hedinger syndrome as a cardiac manifestation of carcinoid syndrome. Suspicion should be raised whenever a physician encounters isolated right heart valvular disease.

Supplementary material

Supplementary material is available at European Heart Journal – Case Reports.

Consent: The patient reported in this case is deceased. Despite the best efforts of the authors, they have been unable to contact the patient’s next of kin to obtain consent for publication. Every effort has been made to anonymize the case. This situation has been discussed with the editors.

Funding: None declared.

Supplementary Material

ytad092_Supplementary_Data Click here for additional data file.

Data availability

The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding author.

